
===== d0354374-2._2026______________________________.pdf =====
2026학년도 

아주대학교  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

인문계열

성        명

전        형

수험번호

  2026학년도  아주대학교  편입학  수강능력시험

표지를  제외한  페이지  수:  24 

 
 
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

Questions  1-5:  Choose  the  word  that  best  completes  the  sentence. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

1.  (0.8  points)  The  global  boom  in  artificial  intelligence  has  __________  a  giant  wave  of  data 

center  construction.  Developers  are  committing  vast  sums  of  capital  to  build  facilities 

capable  of  powering  large  language  models.

①  diluted     

②  counteracted

③  shaped

④  unleashed

⑤  constrained                                                                                                                   

2.  (0.8  points)  To  enhance  security,  online  platforms  have  implemented  measures  to  counter 

inauthentic  activity,  with  most  requiring  users 

to  confirm  account  authenticity  via  a 

one-time  password  sent  through  a  short  message  service  (SMS).  However,  there  exists  a 

thriving  market  for  buying  and  selling  on-demand  SMS  __________,  which  forms  a 

cornerstone  of  the  wider  online  manipulation  economy.

① violations

②  ventilations

③  variations

④  verifications

⑤  vocations                                                                                                                                           

3.  (0.8  points)  There  is  a  realization  that  the  challenges  now  faced  by  the  world  are  so 

__________  that  no  one  discipline  can  provide  all  the  answers.  The  hunt  for  more 

sustainable  methods  of  growth  is  an  example  of  this.  The  need  to  balance  the  impact  on 

energy  consumption,  agriculture,  health,  the  economy,  and  our  communities  highlights  how 

a  deeper  understanding  of  the  complex  makeup  of  the  links  involved  is  essential  to  the 

development  of  effective  solutions  to  difficult  problems.

-  1  -

                                       
     
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

①  temporary

②  predictable

③  inevitable

④  interconnected

⑤  exaggerated                                                                                                                                           

4.  (1.0  points)  Historically,  men  have  dominated  professions  such  as  planning,  architecture, 

urban  design,  engineering,  policymaking,  development,  and  budgeting.  This  __________  has 

resulted  in  urban  infrastructures  and  systems  that  are  not  sensitive  to  women’s  lives. 

Although  these  fields  are  becoming  more  diverse,  city  building  continues  to  fail  women. 

As  we  head  into  an  ever  more  urbanized  future,  it’s  crucial  that  our  cities  work  for 

everyone.

①  warning

②  decline

③  skew

④  balance

⑤  coincidence   

5.  (0.8  points)  Numerous  studies  investigate  various  emotional  responses,  interventions,  and 

assessments  in  AI  educational  contexts  from  what  emotions  are  generated  by  communication 

with  AI  and  how  AI  supports  students’  assessment  and  participation  in  education  emotionally 

to  how  AI  recognizes  and  predicts  students’  emotions.  Yet,  there  are  no  current  studies  that 

explore  whether  these  AI-generative  emotions  in  students  are  different  from  human-generative 

emotions.  How  are  the  AI-__________  emotions  different  or  the  same?  What  are  these 

emotions?

①  induced

②  contested

③  mitigated

④  protected

⑤  negotiated                                                                                                                                               

-  2  -

 
                                                                                                                                       
     
                                                                                 
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Questions  6-10:  Choose  the  expression  that  best  fits  the  sentence. 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.  (1.0  points)  Chelsea  was  born  deaf  in  a  remote  town  in  California.  A  series  of  inept 

doctors  and  clinicians  diagnosed  her  as 

retarded  or  emotionally  disturbed  without 

recognizing  her  deafness  (a  common  fate  for  many  deaf  children  in  the  past).  She  grew  up 

shy,  dependent,  and  languageless  but  otherwise  emotionally  and  neurologically  normal, 

_______________    who  never  believed  she  was  retarded.

① by  sheltering  loved  a  family

②  sheltered  loving  by  a  family 

③  by  sheltering  loving  a  family

④  sheltered  by  a  loving  family

⑤  sheltering  by  a  loved  family

7.  (1.1  points)  He  looked  himself  over  pretty  hard  and  came  up  with  at  least  seven  different 

shades  and  colors  right  on  his  own  skin,  _______________  he  would  call  white  (except 

for  his  eyeballs,  which  weren’t  any  whiter  than  the  eyeballs  of  the  kids  in  the  East  End).

①  not  being  what  one  of  them 

②  what  one  of  them  not  being 

③  one  of  them  being  what  not 

④  what  being  not  one  of  them

⑤  not  one  of  them  being  what

8.  (0.8  points)  Since  we  are  discussing  baseball  slang,  I  cannot  resist  explaining  the  lovely 

phrase  a  can  of  corn,  an  old  term  for  a  high,  lazy  fly  ball.  It  goes  back  to  the  early 

decades  of  the  twentieth  century,  when  grocery  stores  stacked  canned  goods  on  a  high 

shelf  and  the  grocer  would  retrieve  a  can  by  tipping  it  with  a  pole  or  grabber  and 

catching  it  as  it  fell,  _______________  an  outfielder  catches  a  fly  ball. 

①  in  contrast

② much  as 

③ because  the  way

④  as  result

⑤  regarding  as

-  3  -

 
   
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

9.  (1.0  points)  Though  parents  often  worry  about  the  number  of  hours  a  day  that  children 

spend  on  screens,  studying  the  actual  effects  is  challenging,  and  many  who  research 

screens  and  youth  mental  health  caution  against  painting  _______________.

①  too  a  broad  with  brush 

②  with  a  brush  broad  too

③  with  too  broad  a  brush

④ a  brush  too  broad  with

⑤  a  brush  with  too  broad

10.  (0.8  points)  A 

federal  vaccine  committee  voted 

today 

to  end 

the  decades-long 

recommendation  that  all  newborns  _______________  at  birth  against  hepatitis  B,  a  highly 

infectious  virus  that  leads  to  chronic  liver  disease  in  most  infected  children.

①  have  been  immunized

②  have  immunized   

③ be  immunized   

④ will  be  immunizing 

⑤  were  immunizing 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Questions  11-14:  Choose  the  underlined  word  or  phrase  that  must  be  changed  for  the 

sentence  to  be  correct. 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11.  (1.0  points)  The  stock  market  ①has  been  broken  multiple  records  this  year,  brushing  past 

tariffs  and  signs  of  a  strained  American  consumer,  and  ②recovering  from  a  recent  dip, 

largely  because  of 

the  promise  of  artificial 

intelligence.  Share  prices  of  some  AI 

companies  ③have  risen  dramatically  in  a  short  time,  and  tech  companies  are  spending 

billions  to  build  data  centers  and  microchip  plants  to  power  the  boom.  While  investors 

and  analysts  ④see  good  reasons  to  justify  the  exuberance  behind  the  nearly  fifty  percent 

increase  in  the  S&P  500  over  the  past  two  years,  some  warn  that  current  valuations  ⑤

still  rest  on  a  big  bet  for  the  future.   

-  4  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

12.  (1.1  points)  There  is  perhaps  ①no  more  traditionally  masculine  literary  genre  than  the 
seafaring  tale.  ②The  subject  be  Ishmael*  or  Hornblower†,  such  books  nearly  always  offer 

a  vision  of  men,  alone,  without  the  comforts  or  tribulations  of  female  company.  So  ③it  is 

exciting  to  read  Tilar  J.  Mazzeo’s  The  Sea  Captain’s  Wife,  in  which  the  19-year-old  Mary 

Ann  Patten,  in  1856,  ④took  command  of  her  husband’s  ship  and  became  the  first  female 

captain  to  navigate  the  Southern  Ocean.  While  it  is  certainly  one  Massachusetts  woman’s 

story,  it  is  also  ⑤a  larger  tale  of  how  women  fit  into  the  seafaring  culture  of  the  time. 

*  Ishmael:  the  narrator  of  Moby-Dick,  a  classic  novel  by  Herman  Melville  about  a  whaling  voyage.
†  Hornblower:  the  main  character  of  C.  S.  Forester’s  Hornblower  series,  naval  adventure  novels.

13.  (1.0  points)  The  monsoon  season  lasts  from  June  to  September  in  southern  Asia.  During 

this  period,  nearly  60%  of  Bangladesh’s  population  ①is  at  risk  from  floods.  Last  year, 

about  5  million  people  ②were  affected  by  flash  floods  caused  by  heavy  rains.  Increasingly 

heavy  rains  ③are  submerging  parts  of  India  and  Pakistan,  too.  This  year  alone,  45%  of 

India  ④have  experienced  extreme  rainfall,  leading  to  some  1,500  deaths.  In  Pakistan,  2 

million  people  have  had 

to  evacuate 

their  homes  and  ⑤more 

than  800  have  died.                 

14.  (1.1  points)  Ernest  Hemingway  was  raised  ①by  Oak  Park,  Illinois,  a  suburb  of  Chicago. 

After  high  school,  he  spent  six  months  as  a  reporter  for  The  Kansas  City  Star  ②before 

enlisting  in  the  Red  Cross.  He  served  as  an  ambulance  driver  on  the  Italian  Front  in 

World  War  I  and  ③was  seriously  wounded  by  shrapnel  in  1918.  In  1921,  Hemingway 

moved  to  Paris,  where  he  worked  as  a  foreign  correspondent  for  the  Toronto  Star  and  was 

influenced  by 

the  modernist  writers  and  artists  of 

the  “Lost  Generation”  expatriate 

community.  His  debut  novel,  The  Sun  Also  Rises,  was  published  in  1926.  In  1928, 

Hemingway  returned  ④to  the  U.S.,  where  he  settled  in  Key  West,  Florida.  His  experiences 

during  the  war  ⑤supplied  material  for  his  1929  novel  A  Farewell  to  Arms.

-  5  -

                                                                                                       
 
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Questions  15-18:  Choose  the  number  with  the  correct  set  of  statements  that  can  be 

restated  or  inferred  from  the  original  text. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15.  (1.1  points)  The  outsized  human  brain  is  a  vulnerable  organ  which  can  be  damaged  by 

tumors,  infections,  malnutrition,  blocked  or  burst  arteries,  and  injuries  from  falls,  bullets, 

or  car  accidents.  Many  people  who  have  suffered  these  tragedies  participate  in  experiments 

that  assess  what  they  can  and  cannot  do.  Some  do  it  for  money,  some  to  gain  insight 

into  what  part  of  them  has  been  lost  and  what  remains,  and  some  as  an  altruistic 

contribution  to  science.  Through  such  studies,  researchers  are  able  to  link  specific  patterns 

of 

impairment 

to  particular  neural  systems.  These 

findings  not  only  deepen  our 

understanding  of  how  the  healthy  brain  supports  perception,  language,  and  reasoning,  but 

also  inform  clinical  efforts  aimed  at  rehabilitation. 

(a)  People  with  brain  injuries  contribute  to  scientific  knowledge  not  only  for  personal 

reasons  but  also  for  the  benefit  of  others.

(b)  Damage  to  the  brain  can  selectively  disrupt  certain  abilities  while  leaving  others 

relatively  intact.

(c)  Thanks  to  its  evolutionary  advantages,  the  human  brain  remains  highly  resistant  to 

physical  and  biological  threats.

(d)  Clinical  rehabilitation  practices  cannot  provide  information  for  research  that  connects 

behavioral  deficits  to  neural  damage.

① (a)  &  (b)

②  (b)  &  (c) 

③  (a)  &  (d) 

④  (a),  (b)  &  (d)

⑤ (b),  (c)  &  (d)   

-  6  -

       
 
 
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

16.  (1.1  points)  To  improve  the  odds  for  new-product  success  in  its  growing  medical  device 

business,  Johnson  &  Johnson  (J&J)  has  made  a  number  of  changes.  First,  it  is  trying  to 

replicate 

the  dynamic  venture-capital  world  within 

the  company  by  creating 

internal 

start-ups  that  seek  financing  from  other  J&J  units.  J&J  is  also  pushing  for  greater  input 

from  doctors  and  insurers  to  provide  stronger  assurance  that  any  devices  it  introduces  will 

be  highly  desirable,  feasible,  and  cost-effective.  The  Ethicon-Endo  unit  designed  new 

surgical  clips  based  on  discussions  with  physicians  about  the  need  to  make  surgery  less 

invasive.  J&J  also  put  one  of  its  most  successful  scientists  in  the  newly  created  position 

of  chief  science  and  technology  officer  to  encourage  collaboration  between  J&J’s  different 

businesses  and  to  overcome  barriers  in  its  decentralized  structure.

(a)  J&J  is  attempting  to  introduce  a  venture-capital-style  environment  within  the  company 

by  creating  internal  start-ups.

(b)  J&J  has  decided  to  centralize  all  of  its  business  units  in  order  to  eliminate  its   

decentralized  organizational  structure.

(c)  The  appointment  of  a  chief  science  and  technology  officer  reflects  J&J’s  effort  to 

strengthen  collaboration  across  its  business  units.

(d)  J&J  seeks  to  reduce  the  risk  of  unsuccessful  product  launches  by  incorporating 

feedback  from  medical  professionals  and  insurers.

① (a)  &  (b)

② (b)  &  (c) 

③  (a)  &  (d) 

④  (a),  (b)  &  (d)

⑤  (a),  (c)  &  (d)   

17.  (1.1  points)  The  demographic  future  of  the  planet  has  rarely  been  as  questioned  as  it  is 
today.  For  much  of  the  20th  century,  the  demographic  transition  theory  provided  a  clear 

narrative:  With  modernization  and  development,  populations  move  from  high  mortality  and 

fertility 

to 

low  mortality  and  fertility,  and  demographic  projections  could  be  safely 

extrapolated  from  that  trajectory.  Today,  by  contrast,  most  people  live  in  countries  that 

have  already  completed  this  transition.  Across  much  of  the  globe,  fertility  has  fallen 

below  replacement  levels,  defined  as  about  two  children  per  woman  needed  to  keep  a 

population  stable  over  time.  As  a  result,  migration  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  longevity  have 

become  central  to  population  change.  We  are  entering  a  post-transitional  world  in  which 

the  tools  and  theories  that  served  demography  so  well  are  under  strain,  especially  when  it 

comes  to  anticipating  future  fertility.

-  7  -

 
       
 
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

(a)  New  global  demographic  models  have  been  developed 

to 

replace 

traditional 

demographic  transition  theory.

(b)  In  today’s  world,  migration  plays  a  more  decisive  role  in  shaping  population  change 

than  fertility  alone.

(c)  Predicting  future  population  change  has  become  far  more  difficult  than  in  the  past.

(d)  A  growing  number  of  countries  are  actively  encouraging  immigration  as  a  means  of 

bolstering  their  population  size.

① (b)   

② (c)

③ (b)  &  (c) 

④ (a)  &  (b)   

⑤ (a)  &  (d) 

18.  (1.1  points)  Gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  was  never  designed  to  be  a  measure  of 

societal  well-being.  It  tracks  only  market  transactions,  conflates  costs  and  benefits,  and 

ignores  the  distribution  of  income,  the  contributions  of  household  labor  and  volunteer 

work,  and  social  and  environmental  costs  and  benefits.  In  the  decades  after  the  Second 

World  War,  GDP  growth  functioned  as  a  reasonable  proxy  for  well-being  when  rebuilding 

economies  and  increasing  production  and  consumption  were  the  main  priorities.  However, 

since  about  1950,  ecological 

limits, 

inequality,  and  declining  social  cohesion  have 

restricted  further  improvements  on  well-being.  At  the  same  time,  the  rapid  development  of 

artificial  intelligence  promises  fresh  opportunities  and  challenges.

  (a)  Because  GDP  was  never  designed  as  a  measure  of  societal  well-being,  economic 

growth  does  not  necessarily  indicate  an  improvement  in  societal  well-being. 

    (b)  In 

the  postwar  era,  economic  reconstruction  and 

increases 

in  production  and 

consumption  were  linked  to  improvements  in  societal  well-being. 

    (c)  One  reason  improvements  in  societal  well-being  have  slowed  since  1950  is  the 

decline  in  social  cohesion,  a  factor  that  GDP  fails  to  capture. 

    (d)  The  development  of  artificial  intelligence  has  been  shown  to  enhance  well-being. 

① (a)  &  (b)

② (b)  &  (d) 

③ (a),  (b)  &  (c)

④ (a),  (c)  &  (d)

⑤ (a),  (b),  (c)  &  (d)                                                                  

-  8  -

 
 
       
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions  19-50:  Read  each  passage  and  answer  the  corresponding  questions  for  each. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
※ Questions  19  through  22  are  based  on  the  following  passage. 

[A]  Envy  is  the  pain  we  feel  when  we  see  someone  else  enjoying  good  things  that  we 

ourselves  value.  We  feel  it  toward  our  equals,  not  with  the  idea  of  getting  something  for 

ourselves,  but  because  others  have  it.  By  “equals”  I  mean  equals  in  birth,  relationship,  age, 

disposition,  distinction,  or  wealth.

[B]  We  also  feel  envy  when  we  fall  just  short  of  having  everything  we  desire.  This  is 

why  people  in  positions  of  power  and  prosperity  often  feel  envy.  They  believe  others  are 

taking  what  rightfully  belongs  to  them.  People  who  stand  out  in  some  way—especially 

through  intelligence  or  good  fortune—also  tend  to  be  envious.  Ambitious  men  are  more 

envious  than  those  who  are  not.  In  general,  anyone  who  aims  at  a  reputation  for  anything 

is  envious  in  this  respect.  Small-minded  men  are  envious  because  everything  seems  great  to 

them.

[C]  Achievements,  honors,  possessions,  and  gifts  of  fortune  can  trigger  envy,  especially 

when  we  desire  them  or  believe  we  are  entitled  to  them.  Envy  also  arises  when  having 

them  places  us  slightly  above  others,  or  when  lacking  them  places  us  slightly  below.  It  is 

clear  also  what  kind  of  people  we  envy:  we  envy  those  who  are  near  us  in  time,  place, 

age,  or  reputation.  Hence  the  saying,  “Even  relatives  can  be  jealous  of  one  another.”  We 

do  not  compete  with  men  who  lived  a  hundred  centuries  ago,  or  those  not  yet  born,  or  the 

dead,  or  those  who  dwell  near  the  Pillars  of  Hercules,  or  those  whom,  in  our  opinion  or 

that  of  others,  we  take  to  be  far  below  us  or  far  above  us.  We  tend  to  envy  our 

competitors  or  those  pursuing  the  same  goals.  Hence  the  saying,  “potter  against  potter.” 

[D]  We  also  envy  those  whose  success  or  possessions  serve  as  a  (a)  reproach  to  us.  This 

reaction  most  often  occurs  toward  neighbors  or  social  equals  because  we  clearly  see  our 

failure  to  obtain  it  as  our  own  fault.  This  annoys  us,  and  excites  envy  in  us.  We  envy 

those  who  possess  what  we  believe  we  should  have  or  what  we  once  had  ourselves.  Thus, 

older  people  envy  the  young,  and  individuals  who  have  invested  great  effort  envy  those 

who  achieve  the  same  outcomes  with  little  effort.

-  9  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

19.  (1.1  points)  What  is  the  main  idea  of  paragraph  [B]?   

①  Envy  is  most  common  among  people  with  little  success.

②  Envy  is  strongest  among  people  who  lack  ambition.

③  Envy  is  limited  to  material  achievement.

④  Envy  disappears  once  people  achieve  prosperity.

⑤  Envy  is  linked  to  personality  traits  and  social  standing.                                                           

20.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  closest  in  meaning  to  the  word  (a)  “reproach”  as 

used  in  paragraph  [D]?

①  A  social  rule  or  expectation

②  A  reminder  of  personal  fault  or  failure

③  A  form  of  praise  or  approval

④  An  unexpected  or  accidental  result 

⑤  A  source  of  motivation  or  encouragement                                                                   

21.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  most  likely  to  be  inferred  from  the  passage  above?

①  Envy  is  not  influenced  by  political  ambition.

② People  seeking  approval  tend  to  be  envious  of  others. 

③  People  tend  not  to  envy  those  who  gain  fortune  through  luck.

④  Envy  is  not  directed  toward  individuals  who  share  the  same  cultural  values. 

⑤ Envy  is  minimized  when  individuals  recognize  others’  success  does  not  reflect  their  failure.   

22.  (1.1  points)  According  to  the  passage  above,  which  of  the  following  scenarios  is  the 

LEAST  likely  to  evoke  envy?

① When  a  colleague  who  joined  the  company  at  the  same  time  gets  promoted  ahead  of  you. 

②  When  a  junior  employee  compares  himself  to  the  company’s  legendary  CEO. 

③  When  a  neighbor  wins  the  lottery.

④  When  a  hard-working  composer  encounters  a  young  newcomer  whose  brilliance  appears 

effortless. 

⑤  When  a  retired  athlete  sees  current  athletes  receiving  greater  financial  support  and 

achieving  victories  in  bigger  competitions. 

-  10  -

           
                                                                                                   
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※  Questions  23  through  26  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  While  pop  music  and  dramas  ignited  Hallyu  (The  Korean  Wave),  they  have  not  defined 

its  boundaries.  As  Korean  entertainment  gained  global  recognition,  (a)  interest  quickly  spread 

to  lifestyle  sectors  such  as  food,  cosmetics,  and  fashion.  Korean  cuisine,  in  particular,  has 

become  a  major  symbol  of  this  cultural  shift.  Once  consumed  primarily  within  diaspora 

communities,  Korean  cuisine  has  entered  the  global  mainstream,  ranging  from  street  snacks 

like  tteokbokki  and  kimbap  to  Michelin-starred  fine  dining.  (b)  This  cultural  shift  is  mirrored 

in  trade  statistics:  K-food  exports  grew  at  an  annual  rate  of  5.9  percent  from  2015  to  2019, 

then  accelerated  to  9  percent  per  year  between  2020  and  2024,  reaching  $7.02  billion  in 

value.

[B]  Language  is  another  domain  where  the  impact  of  the  Korean  Wave  is  clearly  visible.  (c) 

Once  primarily  studying  by  heritage  learners,  Korean  is  now  among  the  most  popular 

languages  on  Duolingo,  the  world’s  largest  language  learning  platform.  It  has  even  surpassed 

languages  spoken  in  countries  with  far  larger  populations  and  greater  geopolitical  influence 

such  as  China  and  Russia.  Korean 

is  one  of  only  seven  non-English 

languages  fully 

supported  across  all  28  Duolingo  interface  languages.  Interest  in  official  certification  has  also 

grown.  The  number  of  test  takers  for  the  Korean  language  proficiency  exam  (TOPIK) 

doubled  from  218,869  in  2020  to  428,585  in  2024.

[C]  At  home,  Hallyu  is  reinvigorating  domestic  engagement  with  cultural  heritage.  As  global 

interest  grows,  South  Koreans  are  reimagining  tradition  not  just  as  a  marker  of  identity  but 

as  a  source  of  creative  inspiration.  K-pop  artists  are  at  the  forefront  of  this  movement, 

showing  that  tradition  can  be  both  relevant  and  fashionable.  Blackpink’s  Jennie  incorporated 

motifs  from  ancient  golden  crowns  in  her  “Zen”  music  video,  while  BTS’s  Suga  (as  Agust 

D)  drew  heavily  on  traditional  instruments  and  clothing  in  his  track  “Daechwita.”  This 

reinvention  of  heritage,  now  widely  referred 

to  as  “hip 

tradition,”  (d)  captures  how 

once-sacred  symbols  are  being  transformed  into  accessible,  stylish  expressions  of  creativity.

[D]  The  traditional  dessert  yakgwa  also  exemplifies  this  trend.  (e)  After  going  viral  on  social 

media  in  the  early  2020s,  it  inspired  a  wave  of  modern  reinterpretations,  including  yakgwa 

cookies,  scones,  and  financiers.  Similar  trends  can  be  seen  in  museum  gift  shops,  where 

miniature  replicas  of  ancient  sculptures  and  drinking  glasses  printed  with  classical  Korean 

paintings  frequently  sell  out.  This  renewed  appreciation  has  led  to  a  surge  in  museum 

attendance.  The  National  Museum  of  Korea  welcomed  2.7  million  visitors  in  the  first  half  of 

2025,  a  64.2  percent  increase  from  the  previous  year.  Foreign  visitors  also  hit  a  new  high, 

reaching  nearly  98,000.   

-  11  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

23.  (1.0  points)  According  to  the  passage  above,  which  of  the  following  is  true  about  K-food 

exports?

① They  expanded  primarily  due  to  the  demand  from  diaspora  communities.

② They  declined  briefly  between  2015  and  2019  before  recovering.

③ They  grew  at  a  constant  rate  for  the  past  20  years.

④ They  reached  a  value  of  over  $7  billion  by  2024.

⑤ They  grew  faster  before  2020  than  after  2020.                        

24.  (1.0  points)  Why  does  the  passage  above  mention  artists  such  as  Jennie  and  Suga?

① To  compare  different  styles  of  K-pop  music

② To  show  how  traditional  culture  is  being  reinterpreted  creatively

③ To  illustrate  declining  interest  in  classical  heritage 

④ To  highlight  conflicts  between  tradition  and  modernity

⑤ To  explain  the  origins  of  hip-hop  in  Korea                                 

25.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  LEAST  likely  to  be  inferred  from  the  passage 

above?

① The  rise  in  museum  attendance  reflects  cultural  interest.

② The  global  popularity  of  Korean  culture  has  expanded  beyond  entertainment.

③ Traditional  culture  is  being  reinterpreted  in  contemporary  forms.

④ Social  media  played  a  role  in  popularizing  a  traditional  Korean  dessert.

⑤ Government  policies  promoted  the  global  spread  of  K-food.

26.  (1.1  points)  Which  part  must  be  changed  for  the  sentence  to  be  correct?

① (a)  interest  quickly  spread  to  lifestyle  sectors

② (b)  This  cultural  shift  is  mirrored  in  trade  statistics

③ (c)  Once  primarily  studying  by  heritage  learners

④ (d)  captures  how  once-sacred  symbols  are  being  transformed

⑤ (e)  After  going  viral  on  social  media

-  12  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※ Questions  27  through  30  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  For  decades,  researchers  have  tried  to  understand  why  some  people  consistently  follow 

through  on  their  goals  while  others  struggle,  even  when  motivation,  time,  and  commitment 

are  high.  One  theory,  known  as  Personality  Systems  Interactions  (PSI),  suggests  that  the 

key  lies  in  (a)  how  well  individuals  can  manage  their  emotional  states.  According  to  the 

PSI  theory,  action-oriented  people  are  better  at  switching  (b)  from  planning  to  doing, 

especially  when  faced  with  challenges.

[B]  Based  at  the  University  of  Trier  in  Germany,  researchers  Karla  Waldenmeier  and 

Nicola  Baumann  wanted  to  test  a  central  idea  of  the  PSI  theory:  that  action-oriented 

individuals  are  more  likely  to  achieve  difficult  goals.  Previous  studies  had  looked  at  parts 

of  this  theory,  but  none  had  examined  it  all  together,  specifically,  self-chosen  goals,  the 

difficulty  of  those  goals,  and  whether  they  were  actually  achieved.  The  pair  conducted  a 

longitudinal  study 

involving  199  participants,  mostly  university  students  (85%  female, 

average  age  of  22  years).  Each  participant  (c)  was  asked  to  come  up  with  six  personal 

goals  they  wanted  to  achieve  over  the  next  four  weeks.  They  also  rated  how  difficult  each 

goal  was.  After  the  four-week  period,  participants  reported  on  how  successful  they  had 

been  in  achieving  those  goals.  The  researchers  also  measured  each  person’s  action-state 

orientation  using  a  well-established  psychological  scale.

[C]  The  results  were  clear:  Goal  difficulty  negatively  predicted  goal  achievement  overall, 

meaning  harder  goals  were  less  likely  to  be  achieved.  Additionally,  people  who  scored 

higher  on  action  orientation  were  more  likely  to  achieve  their  goals,  (d)  especially  when 

those  goals  were  rated  as  difficult.  In  contrast,  state-oriented  individuals,  i.e.  those  who 

struggle  to  act  under  pressure,  were  less  successful  when  goals  required  more  effort. 

Interestingly,  when  goals  were  easy,  both  groups  performed  similarly.

[D]  Waldenmeier  and  Baumann  concluded,  “So,  who  climbs  Mount  Everest?  First,  is 

climbing  Mount  Everest  an  easy  or  a  difficult  goal  for  someone?  If  it  is  considered  easy, 

there  shouldn’t  be  a  huge  difference  between  individuals.  However,  if  it  is  considered 

difficult,  action-oriented  individuals  are  more  likely  to  achieve  the  goal  than  state-oriented 

individuals.  This  is  due  to  their  higher  self-regulatory  abilities,  which  are  crucial  when 

attempting  to  achieve  a  difficult  goal,  whether  that  is  climbing  Mount  Everest  or  (e)  calling 

a  sibling  you  just  had  a  huge  fight.”

-  13  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

27.  (1.1  points)  According  to  the  PSI  theory,  what  distinguishes  action-oriented  individuals 

from  state-oriented  individuals?

①  They  tend  to  set  more  ambitious  goals  than  others.

② They  tend  to  prefer  long-term  goals  over  short-term  ones.

③  They  tend  to  be  motivated  mainly  by  rewards  that  come  from  outside.

④  They  tend  to  shift  from  planning  to  action  more  effectively. 

⑤  They  tend  to  experience  fewer  negative  emotions  overall.                                       

28.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  best  describes  the  design  of  the  study?

①  A  cross-sectional  survey  measuring  motivation  at  a  single  point  in  time

②  A  lengthened  study  tracking  self-selected  goals  over  four  weeks

③  A  laboratory  experiment  manipulating  emotional  states

④  A  comparative  study  between  different  age  groups 

⑤  A  qualitative  interview-based  analysis                                                                             

29.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  can  be  most  reasonably  inferred  from  the  study’s 

findings?

①  Motivation  determines  whether  goals  are  successfully  achieved. 

②  State-oriented  individuals  are  incapable  of  achieving  difficult  goals.

③  Increasing  goal  difficulty  always  leads  to  better  performance  outcomes.

④  Emotional  regulation  is  irrelevant  when  goals  are  personally  meaningful.

⑤  Action  orientation  becomes  especially  important  when  goals  are  difficult.                   

30.  (1.0  points)  Which  part  must  be  changed  for  the  sentence  to  be  correct?

①  (a)  how  well  individuals  can  manage  their  emotional  states
②  (b)  from  planning  to  doing,  especially  when  faced  with  challenges

③  (c)  was  asked  to  come  up  with  six  personal  goals

④  (d)  especially  when  those  goals  were  rated  as  difficult

⑤  (e)  calling  a  sibling  you  just  had  a  huge  fight

-  14  -

         
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※ Questions  31  through  34  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  Every  nation  develops  origin  stories  that  shape  its  sense  of  identity,  and  in  American 

history,  the  Pilgrims  occupy  a  central  place  in  collective  memory.  When  researchers  asked 

about  2,000  Americans  to  name  the  most  important  events  in  the  nation’s  founding,  the 

Revolutionary  War,  Declaration  of  Independence,  Christopher  Columbus’  “discovery”  of  the 

Americas,  and  the  Civil  War  topped  the  list,  while  the  Pilgrims  still  ranked  seventh. 

Historians  considered  even  this  seventh-place  ranking  to  be  too  high,  noting  that  the 

Pilgrims  arrived  in  1620  in  what  is  now  Massachusetts  long  after  Native  Americans, 

Spanish  settlers,  and  the  English  in  Jamestown.  Yet  the  Pilgrims’  story,  one  of  religious 

persecution,  perseverance,  and  self-governance,  offers  Americans  a  neat,  heroic  origin,  even 

if  its  historical  accuracy  is  questionable.

[B]  A  key  part  of  that  narrative  is  the  “Thanksgiving  myth.”  The  popular  (a)  version 

claims 

that 

in  1621, 

the  Pilgrims  and  Native  Americans  enjoyed  a  peaceful  harvest 

celebration.  While  a  shared  meal  did  occur,  historians  emphasize  that  this  simplified  tale 

erases  the  devastating  epidemics  that  killed  up  to  90%  of  the  Wampanoag  population 

before 

the  Pilgrims’  arrival  and 

the  violent  conflicts 

that  followed.  After  forming  a 

temporary  alliance  in  1621,  the  Wampanoag  people  could  teach  the  Pilgrims  how  to  harvest 

crops  and  the  Pilgrims  could  protect  the  Wampanoag  people  from  invaders,  but  relations 

deteriorated  as  the  settlers’  population  expanded  and  increasingly  seized  Indigenous  land.  By 

1675,  war  broke  out,  killing  thousands  of  Native  Americans  and  leading  settlers  to  display 

the  Wampanoag  leader’s  severed  head  for  two  decades.

[C]  Despite  efforts  to  correct  the  record,  the  myth  persists  because  history  and  memory 

function  differently.  History  aims  for  (b)  accuracy  even  when 

the  resulting  narrative 

becomes  messy.  Memory,  however,  prioritizes  coherence  and  group  unity,  often  smoothing 

over  conflict  or  cruelty.  Scholars  noted 

that  collective  memory,  shaped  by 

leaders, 

educators,  museums,  and  families,  frequently  sacrifices  complexity  to  preserve  a  shared 

national  story. 

[D]  Psychology  helps  explain  why  such  stories  endure.  Humans  are  “story-minded,”  relying 

on  clear  beginnings,  middles,  and  ends  to  make  sense  of  (c)  overwhelming  information. 

Simplified  narratives  become  mental  habits,  easy  to  recall,  and  resistant  to  change.  Just  as 

people  instinctively  pair  “bread”  with  “butter,”  many  automatically  associate  Thanksgiving 

with  the  Pilgrims  and  friendly  Native  Americans.  Scholars  argue  that  modern  nations  face 

the  challenge  of  sustaining  pride  and  (d)  cohesion  while  also  acknowledging  painful 

histories.  This  balance  remains  unresolved,  but  rising  calls  for  racial  (e)  reckoning  in  the 

U.S.  suggest  a  growing  willingness  to  confront  darker  aspects  of  national  origins.

-  15  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

31.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  statements  about  the  Pilgrims  is  NOT  accurate 

according  to  the  passage  above?

①  Their  story  highlights  themes  of  religious  suffering  and  tenacity.

②  Their  arrival  came  after  several  other  groups,  including  the  Jamestown  settlers.

③  They  arrived  in  what  is  now  Massachusettes  in  1620,  after  devastating  epidemics  had 

already  struck  the  Wampanoag  population. 

④  They  made  an  alliance  with  the  Wampanoag  and  maintained  peace  for  a  century.

⑤  A  shared  meal  between  the  Pilgrims  and  the  Wampanoag  did  occur  in  1621.                       

32.  (1.0  points)  What  is  the  main  purpose  of  paragraph  [B]  in  the  passage  above?

①  To  argue  that  Thanksgiving  should  no  longer  be  celebrated

②  To  deny  that  any  interaction  occurred  between  Pilgrims  and  Native  Americans

③  To  illustrate  how  historical  myths  can  obscure  violence  and  suffering

④  To  show  that  alliances  between  settlers  and  Indigenous  peoples  were  always  short-lived

⑤  To  compare  American  myths  with  those  of  other  nations                                                   

33.  (0.8  points)  Which  of  the  following  pairs  includes  an  expression  that  CANNOT  replace 

the  underlined  expression  in  the  passage  above? 

①  (a)  version,  type

②  (b)  accuracy,  factual  correctness 

③  (c)  overwhelming,  burdensome

④  (d)  cohesion,  social  unity

⑤  (e)  reckoning,  calculation             

34.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  best  reflects  the  author’s  main  claim  in  the  passage 

above?

①  The  Pilgrims  are  historically  the  most  important  founders  of  the  United  States,  and  their 

central  place  in  collective  memory  is  not  fully  justified.

②  The  Thanksgiving  story  accurately  represents  the  long-lasting  peace  that  existed  between 

the  Pilgrims  and  Native  Americans.

③  Psychological  research  shows  that  people  easily  abandon  origin  myths  once  they  are 

presented  with  accurate  historical  facts.

④  Collective  memory  often  favors  a  tidy  narrative  over  the  messier  reality  of  history.

⑤  Modern  nations  maintain  patriotic  unity  even  when  fully  incorporating  the  most  disturbing 

aspects  of  their  past  into  public  memory.         

-  16  -

                                                                                     
             
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※ Questions  35  through  38  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  When  the  nights  draw  in,  the  leaves  fall  off  the  trees,  and  the  outside  world  becomes 

blanketed  in  frost,  so  many  of  us  will  be  tempted  to  reach  for  the  thermostat  and  crank  up 
the  heating.  When  venturing  outdoors,  we  will  likely  wrap  up  in  a  scarf  and  hat,  piling  on 
the  layers  in  a  desperate  attempt  to  keep  warm.  Yet  being  cold  and  uncomfortable  could 
be  the  key  to  improving  health  and  losing  weight.  ❶  The  reason  is  all  down  to  a  special 
type  of  fat  called  brown  fat.  Unlike  white  fat,  which  clings  (a)  stubbornly  to  thighs, 
waists,  and  hips,  brown  fat  burns  calories  by  converting  them  into  heat  when  we  are  cold. 

Some  believe  that  if  (b)  harnessed  properly,  it  could  make  us  thinner.  Intriguingly,  all  we 
theoretically  need  to  do  to  activate  it  is  to  hop  into  a  cold  shower  or  eat  lots  of  spicy 
food  and  caffeine.  But  before  you  jump  into  an  icy  lake  or  down  that  fourth  cup  of 

coffee,  it  is  worth  exploring  whether  the  hype  behind  brown  fat  is  justified.

[B]  When  we  are  born,  each  of  us  has  plentiful  stores  of  brown  fat  which  act  like  an 
internal  heater.  ❷  Babies  don’t  have  enough  muscle  mass  to  shiver,  so  they  rely  on  brown 
fat  to  convert  sugars  and  fats  into  heat.  Brown  fat  cells  have  a  disproportionately  high 

number  of  mitochondria,  the  energy  producing  factories  inside  cells.  But  unlike  normal 

mitochondria  which  produce  Adenosine  Triphosphate  (ATP),  a  kind  of  universal  energy 
currency,  the  mitochondria  inside  brown  fat  cells  contain  a  protein  called  thermogenin  or 

UCP1,  which  allows  them  to  convert  calories  from  food  into  heat  instead. 

[C]  Most  of  what  we  know  about  this  brown  fat  comes  from  studies  on  small  mammals 

such  as  mice  and  rats.  These  rodents  have  large  reserves  of  it,  which  helps  them  keep 

toasty  and  warm  during  the  winter  months  when  they  go  into  (c)  hibernation.  Decades  of 
research  shows  that,  in  mice  at  least,  brown  fat  sucks  up  sugars  and  fats  from  the 
bloodstream.  ❸  Brown  fat  also  appears 
diseases  linked  with  weight  such  as  diabetes  and  heart  disease.

to  protect  mice  from  obesity  and  metabolic 

[D]  Adult  humans  are,  however,  (d)  adept  at  finding  other  ways  to  keep  warm  by  turning 

the  heat  on,  snuggling  under  a  thick  duvet,  or  putting  on  an  extra-warm  coat.  It  was 

widely  assumed  that  brown  fat  all  but  disappeared  by  (e)  puberty  with  the  traditional  white 
thigh-hugging  fat  that  we  are  all  familiar  with  taking  its  place.  ❹  This  also  meant  that 
most  scientists  believed  it  was  impossible  for  brown  fat  to  play  a  meaningful  role  in  health 

beyond  infanthood.  This  changed  in  2009,  however,  when  a  group  of  researchers  showed 
that  human  adults  not  only  still  have  brown  fat,  but  also  in  temperatures  below  16°C,  the 

fat  activated  and  started  absorbing  glucose  and  fats  from  the  bloodstream.  Not  only  that, 

there  was  a  clear  correlation  between  a  person’s  body  weight  and  their  brown  fat  reserves. 
Those  with  more  brown  fat  also  had  higher  metabolic  rates  in  the  cold.  ❺  Together,  this 
suggested  that  brown  fat  could  be  a  target  for  the  treatment  of  obesity.

-  17  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

35.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  would  be  the  best  title  for  the  passage  above?

①  The  Cold-Activated  Fat  That  Could  Help  Burn  Calories  and  Improve  Health

②  The  Human  Body’s  Reliance  on  White  Fat  as  Its  Key  Source  of  Warmth 

③  Modern  Humans  Adapted  to  Winter  Through  Biological  Evolution

④  The  Functions  of  Brown  Fat  and  Its  Irrelevance  to  Adult  Health 

⑤  Simple  Lifestyle  Hacks  That  Guarantee  Rapid  Weight  Loss 

36.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  LEAST  likely  to  be  inferred  from  the  passage 

above? 

①  Because  modern  humans  rely  on  heating  to  stay  warm,  brown  fat  no  longer  plays  a 

significant  role  in  adult  metabolisms.

②  Brown  fat  differs  from  white  fat  in  that  it  burns  calories  to  generate  heat  when  the  body 

is  exposed  to  cold.

③  Research  on  rodents  has  shown 

that  brown  fat  absorbs  glucose  and  fats  from 

the 

bloodstream. 

④  Since  2009,  some  studies  have  demonstrated  that  adults  retain  active  brown  fat,  especially 

in  cold  conditions.

⑤  Because  infants  lack  sufficient  muscle  mass  to  shiver,  they  depend  on  brown  fat  to 

maintain  body  temperature  after  birth.

37.  (0.8  points)  Which  of  the  following  pairs  includes  an  expression  that  CANNOT  replace 

the  underlined  expression  in  the  passage  above? 

①  (a)  stubbornly,  permanently

②  (b)  harnessed,  utilized 

③  (c)  hibernation,  winter  dormancy 

④  (d)  adept,  skilled

⑤  (e)  puberty,  adolescence 

38.  (1.0  points)  The  following  sentence  is  removed  from  the  passage  above.  In  which  part 

may  it  be  inserted  to  support  the  argument  made  by  the  author? 

  Thinner,  leaner  individuals  had  more,  and  obese  people  less.

①  ❶ 

②  ❷

③  ❸

④  ❹

⑤  ❺

-  18  -

             
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※  Questions  39  through  42  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  Several  countries  in  the  Asia  Pacific  region,  Europe,  and  North  America  pushed  new 

rules  to  shrink  all  or  parts  of  their  immigrant  populations  in  2024.  In  some  cases,  the 

moves  were  driven  by  explicit  aims  to  reduce  immigration  after  a  post-pandemic  surge  in 

arrivals  swelled  immigrant  populations  to  historic  sizes.  In  other  places,  tweaks  to  legal 

immigration  systems  were  meant  to  prioritize  long-term  settlement  of  people  with  higher 

skill  levels,  rather  than  low-wage  temporary  workers  and  international  students.

[B]  Perhaps  (a)  no  place  the  moves  were  more  dramatic  than  in  Canada,  where  the 

government  publicly  backtracked  on  its  2022  commitment  to  accept  up  to  500,000  new 

immigrants  per  year  through  2026.  “We  didn’t  get  the  balance  quite  right,”  Prime  Minister 

Justin  Trudeau  said,  in  the  face  of  (b)  significant  public  backlash  to  rising  immigration. 

Instead, 

the  government  proposed  keeping 

the  number  of  annual  new  arrivals  below 

400,000  and  declining  to  365,000  in  2027.  Ottawa  also  planned  to  reduce  the  number  of 

temporary  immigrants  to  5%  of  the  total  population,  down  from  nearly  7%  at  mid-year. 

Earlier  in  the  year,  it  capped  the  number  of  international  student  applications  for  the  first 

time.  The  changes,  which  were  in  part  precipitated  by  public  anxiety  over  housing  costs, 

are  expected  to  lead  to  small  population  declines  in  2025  and  2026.

[C]  The  shift  was  similar  to  the  transformation  of  Australia’s  immigration  system,  which 

involved  less  of  a  policy  whiplash.  The  government  (c)  has  committed  to  more  than 

halving  net  immigration  from  a  record  high  of  548,000  in  the  year  ending  September 

2023,  to  250,000  in  2025.  The  high  numbers  were  something  of  a  bounce-back  after 

borders  reopened  following  the  pandemic  and  (d)  were  largely  driven  by  international 

students  and  temporary  workers.  A  new  cap  for  international  students,  unveiled  in  August, 

has  a  special  focus  on 

trimming  enrollment  at 

institutions 

that  critics  allege  offer 

low-quality  education  and  enroll  students  only  to  provide  them  legal  rights  to  enter  and 

work  in  Australia.

[D]  Still,  the  immigration-limiting  moves  were  not  emulated  everywhere.  While  many 

governments  (e)  fretted  about  too  many  new  arrivals  in  the  post-pandemic  period,  others 

have  grown 

increasingly  anxious  about  workforce  demands  and  sought 

to 

increase 

immigration  or  offer  legal  statuses.  Changes  in  East  Asia  and  Southern  Europe  have  been 

particularly  notable,  as  countries  such  as  Japan,  South  Korea,  and  Spain,  all  of  which  have 

for  years  reckoned  with  demographic  imbalances  due  to  their  aging  societies,  took  new 

steps  to  make  immigration  easier.

-  19  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

39.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  would  be  the  best  title  for  the  passage  above?

①  Countries  Seek  to  Reduce  or  Change  the  Mix  of  Their  Immigrant  Populations
②  In  Search  of  Foreign  Workers  to  Boost  Countries’  Labor  and  Demographic  Outlook
③  Amid  the  Blame  Game  Over  Affordable  Housing  Crises,  Immigration  Cited  as  the  Cause
④  New  Externalization  Plans  Push  the  Envelope  for  Immigration  Management  Abroad
⑤  Denying  Access  to  Immigration  Goes  Mainstream  in  Many  Countries

40.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  LEAST  likely  to  be  inferred  from  the  passage 

above? 

①  Some  nations  sought 

to  prioritize  highly  skilled, 

long-term  migrants  over 

temporary 

workers  and  international  students.

②  In  2024,  several  countries  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region,  Europe,  and  North  America  adopted 

policies  to  reduce  immigration  levels.

③  Countries  mentioned  in  the  passage  all  expanded  immigration  in  2024  to  meet  growing 

post-pandemic  labor  demands.

④  Canada  scaled  back  its  immigration  targets,  reduced  temporary  migration,  and  capped 

international  students  in  response  to  public  pressure  over  housing  costs.

⑤  Some  countries  in  East  Asia  and  Southern  Europe  eased  immigration  rules  to  address  labor 

shortages  caused  by  aging  populations.     

41.  (0.8  points)  Which  part  must  be  changed  for  the  sentence  to  be  correct?

①  (a)  no  place  the  moves  were  more  dramatic
②  (b)  significant  public  backlash  to  rising  immigration
③  (c)  has  committed  to  more  than  halving  net  immigration
④  (d)  were  largely  driven  by  international  students  and  temporary  workers
⑤  (e)  fretted  about  too  many  new  arrivals         

42.  (1.1  points)  According  to  the  passage  above,  which  of  the  following  is  true  about  the 

Australian  immigration  system?   

①  The  Australian  government  has  relaxed  student  visa  regulations 

to  encourage  more 

international  students  and  temporary  workers.

②  The  recent  surge  in  net  immigration  was  mainly  driven  by  an  increase  in  permanent 

migrants.

③  Australia’s  recent  immigration  policy  shift  is  characterized  by  sudden  policy  reversals.
④  The  new  cap  on  international  students  applies  to  all  institutions  regardless  of  educational 

quality.

⑤  The  Australian  government  has  pledged 

to  reduce  net 

immigration  from  548,000  in 

September  2023  to  250,000  by  2025.

-  20  -

                                       
 
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※ Questions  43  through  46  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  It  has  been  almost  nine  years  since  the  UK  Review  on  antimicrobial  resistance 

(AMR),  which  I  chaired,  published 

its  final  recommendations.  Since 

then,  I  have 

occasionally  checked  in  on  the  progress  made  toward  our  twenty-nine  specific  proposals 

and  consistently  ended  up  disappointed.  Despite  the  attention  our  work  received  at  the 

time,  very  few  of  our  suggestions  have  been  implemented. 

[B]  In  conducting  the  review,  my  team  and  I  (a)  drew  on  our  diverse  past  experiences 

and  sources  of  expertise  to  address  both  the  supply  and  the  demand  side  of  the  problem: 

namely,  the  lack  of  effective  treatments  or  alternatives,  both  on  the  market  and  in  the 

development  pipeline,  and  the  excessive  use  of  current  antibiotics.  As  I  have  noted  before, 

raising  funds  to  develop  novel  antibiotics  through  “push  incentives”  (support  for  basic 

research)  has  had  some  success.  But  beyond  one  promising  UK  initiative,  there  has  been 

little  progress  toward  introducing  stronger  “pull  incentives”  (rewards)  for  pharmaceutical 

companies,  and 

there  has  been  almost  no  action  on  our  other  supply-boosting 

recommendations.

[C]  In  terms  of  reducing  demand,  one  big  victory  is  the  reduced  use  of  antimicrobials  in 

agriculture  in  some  parts  of  the  world.  This  partly  reflects  shifting  consumer  preferences 

in  favor  of  antibiotic-free  foods,  but  it  also  follows  policies  that  are  similar  or  even 

identical  to  what  we  recommended.  As  an  economist,  I  always  considered  our  most 

important  recommendation  to  be  the  one  pushing  for  (b)  affordable  rapid  diagnostics.  This 

technological  solution  is  key  to  ensuring  that  those  who  are  ill  get  the  right  treatment, 

but  also  that  (1)  _________________________________.  Permanently  reducing  the  demand 

for  antimicrobials  is  one  of  the  most  important  steps  we  can  take.

[D]  Yet  very  little  has  happened  in  this  area  despite  the  rapid  development  and  diffusion 

of  relevant  technologies  like  AI.  Why  is  this?  One  big  issue,  most  likely,  is  that  the  cost 

of  diagnosis  still  exceeds  the  cost  of  simply  prescribing  an  antibiotic.  While  the  proper 

use  of  diagnostics  would  deliver  substantial  benefits  by  slowing  the  spread  of  AMR,  this 

is  a  positive  (c)  externality  that  is  not  captured  in  the  current  market.  Pharmaceutical 

companies  and  others  would  (d)  remedy  this  market  failure  by  simply  allowing  for  a 

significant  rise  in  the  price  of  antimicrobials  by  arguing  that  this  would  incentivize  the 

industry  to  research  useful  new  drugs.  However,  such  proposals  ignore  the  fact  that  many 

people  across  advanced-,  middle-,  and  low-income  economies  would  not  be  able  to  afford 

high-priced  drugs.  A  higher  price  point  would  discriminate  according  to  a  patient’s  (e) 

means  when  what  we  actually  want  is  to  discriminate  according  to  their  medical  needs.

-  21  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

43.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  would  be  the  best  title  for  the  passage  above?

①  Why  Will  Market-Driven  Increases  in  Antimicrobial  Prices  Solve  Antimicrobial  Resistance?
②  How  Has  the  AMR  Review  Successfully  Transformed  Global  Health  Policy?
③  Why  Has  the  Fight  Against  Antimicrobial  Resistance  Fallen  Short?

④  How  Have  Diagnostic  Technologies  Led  to  a  Global  Reduction  in  Antibiotic  Overuse?

⑤  What  Pull  Incentives  Have  Revitalized  the  Pharmaceutical  Pipeline  for  New  Antibiotics?

44.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  would  best  fit  in  blank  (1)  in  paragraph  [C]?

①  our  recommendation  is  to  legislate  bans  against  prescriptions  of  antimicrobials
②  diagnostics  can  differ  depending  on  the  disease  in  question
③  antimicrobials  are  not  applied  unnecessarily

④  some  have  been  approaching  the  problem  through  the  lens  of  specific  illnesses

⑤  a  host  of  researchers  have  come  together  to develop a  method  for  such  technologies

45.  (0.8  points)  Which  of  the  following  pairs  includes  an  expression  that  CANNOT  replace 

the  underlined  expression  in  the  passage  above? 

①  (a)  drew  on,  adapted
②  (b)  affordable,  reasonably  priced 

③  (c)  externality,  spillover  effect

④  (d)  remedy,  address

⑤  (e)  means,  financial  abilities 

46.  (1.1  points)  According  to  the  passage  above,  which  of  the  following  is  true? 

①  The  majority  of  the  UK  Review’s  twenty-nine  proposals  were  fully  implemented  within  a 

few  years  of  publication.

②  Despite  the  attention  it  received,  most  of  the  recommendations  from  the  UK  Review  on 

AMR  have  not  been  put  into  practice.

③  Pull  incentives  for  pharmaceutical  companies  have  been  widely  adopted  across  multiple 

countries.

④  Raising  the  price  of  antimicrobials  is  endorsed  in  the  passage  as  the  most  effective  and 

equitable  solution  to  AMR.

⑤  Advances 

in  AI  have  already  made  rapid  diagnostic 

tools  cheaper 

than  prescribing 

antibiotics.

-  22  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※  Questions  47  through  50  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  In  the  game  known  as  Broken  Telephone  (or  Chinese  Whispers),  a  child  whispers  a 

phrase  into  the  ear  of  a  second  child,  who  whispers  it  into  the  ear  of  a  third  child,  and 

so  on.  (a)  Distortions  accumulate,  and  when  the  last  child  announces  the  phrase,  it  is 

comically  different  from  the  original.  The  game  works  because  each  child  does  not 

merely  degrade  the  phrase,  which  would  culminate  in  a  mumble,  but  re-analyzes  it, 

making  a  best  guess  about  the  words  the  preceding  child  had  in  mind.

[B]  All  languages  change  through  the  centuries.  We  do  not  speak  like  Shakespeare 

(1564-1616),  who  did  not  speak  like  Chaucer  (1343-1400),  who  did  not  speak  like  the 

author  of  Beowulf  (around  750-800).  As  the  changes  take  place,  people  feel  the  ground 

eroding  under  their  feet  and  have  predicted  the  imminent  (b)  demise  of  the  language. 

Yet  the  twelve  hundred  years  of  changes  since  Beowulf  have  not  left  us  grunting  like 

Tarzan,  and  that  is  because  language  change  is  a  game  of  Broken  Telephone.

[C]  A  generation  of  speakers  uses  their  lexicon  and  grammar  to  produce  sentences.  The 

younger  generation  listens  to  the  sentences  uttered  by  grown-ups  and  tries  to  infer  the 

lexicon  and  grammar,  which  is  the  remarkable  (c)  feat  we  call  language  acquisition.  The 

transmission  of  a  lexicon  and  grammar  in  language  acquisition  is  fairly  high  in  (d) 

fidelity  (you  probably  can  communicate  well  with  your  parents  and  your  children),  but  it 

is  never  perfect.  Words  rise  and  fall  in  popularity  as  the  needs  of  daily  life  change,  and 

also  as  the  hip  try  to  sound  different  from  the  dweebs  and  graybeards.  Speakers  swallow 

or  warp  some  sounds 

to  save  effort,  and  (e)  enunciate  or  shift  others 

to  make 

themselves  understood.  Immigrants  or  conquerors  with  regional  or  foreign  accents  may 

swamp  the  locals  and  change  the  pool  of  speech  available  to  children.

[D]  Children,  for  their  part,  do  not  mimic  sentences  like  parrots  but  try  to  make  sense 

of  them  in 

terms  of  underlying  words  and  rules.  They  may  perceive  a  mumbled 

consonant  as  no  consonant  at  all,  or  a  lengthened  or  mispronounced  vowel  as  a  different 

vowel.  They  may  fail  to  discern  the  rationale  for  a  rule  and  simply  memorize  its  output 

as  a  list.  Or  they  may  latch  on  to  some  habitual  way  of  ordering  words  and  hypothesize 

a  new  rule  to  make  sense  of  it.  The  language  of  their  generation  will  have  changed 

though  it  need  not  have  deteriorated.  Then  the  process  is  repeated  with  their  children. 

Each  change  may  be  small,  but  as  changes  accumulate  over  centuries,  they  reshape  the 

language  just  as  erosion  and  sedimentation  imperceptibly  sculpt  the  earth. 

-  23  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

47.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  would  be  the  best  title  for  the  passage  above?

①  The  Way  Children  Learn  Language  by  Instinct
②  The  Inevitable  Decay  of  Language  Over  Time
③  The  Language  Change  as  a  Game  of  Broken  Telephone
④  The  Role  of  Pronunciation  in  Modern  Language
⑤  The  Decline  of  Language  Caused  by  Immigration

48.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  LEAST  likely  to  be  inferred  from  the  passage 

above?

①  Language  change  occurs  because  each  generation  slightly  reinterprets  the  speech  it  hears 

rather  than  copying  it  perfectly.

②  Children  acquire  language  by  inferring  underlying  words  and  grammatical  rules  from  the 

speech  of  adults.

③  Language  change  inevitably  leads  to  the  deterioration  and  simplification  of  language  over 

the  centuries. 

④  Although  communication  across  generations 

is 

largely  successful, 

the 

transmission  of 

language  is  never  completely  error-free.

⑤  The  game  of  Broken  Telephone  illustrates  how  small  distortions  in  transmission  can 

accumulate  and  reshape  language  over  time.

49.  (0.8  points)  Which  of  the  following  pairs  includes  an  expression  that  CANNOT  replace 

the  underlined  expression  in  the  passage  above? 

①  (a)  distortions,  deviations
② (b)  demise,  improvement
③ (c)  feat,  achievement 
④  (d)  fidelity,  accuracy 
⑤ (e)  enunciate,  articulate

50.  (1.1  points)  What 

is 

the  most  appropriate  reason 

the  author  mentions  Shakespeare, 

Chaucer,  and  Beowulf  in  paragraph  [B]?

①  To  show  that  only  highly  educated  writers  are  responsible  for  preserving  language  across 

generations

②  To  demonstrate  that  modern  readers  can  no  longer  understand  older  texts  because  language 

change  causes  inevitable  confusion  and  transformations

③  To  compare  the  literary  quality  of  writers  from  different  historical  periods
④  To  illustrate  that  language  has  continually  changed  by  showing  how  language  differed 

across  historical  periods

⑤  To  provide  concrete  examples  of  how  pronunciation  standards  have  gradually  become  more 

precise  over  time

-  24  -

 
   

===== b57ab86d-1._2026______________________________.pdf =====
2026학년도 

아주대학교  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

자연계열 

성        명

전        형

수험번호

  2026학년도  아주대학교  편입학  수강능력시험

표지를  제외한  페이지  수:  19 

 
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Questions  1-2:  Choose  the  expression  that  best  completes  the  sentence.       

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  (1.0  points)  An  aspect  of  cultural  shock  that  can  have  adverse  effects  upon  the  newcomer 

to  a  culture  is  social  alienation  and  feelings  of  loneliness  associated  with  being  isolated 

from  friends  and  home  culture.  Feelings  of  alienation  may  be  delayed  somewhat  because 

concerns  over  _______________  housing, 

transportation,  and  work  may  bugger 

these 

feelings  initially.

① such  basic  matters  as 
② as  basic  matters  such
③ as  such  basic  matters  as
④ such  as  basic  matters  as
⑤ such  basic  as  matters  as

2.  (1.0  points)  Though  no  one  doubts  that  our  thoughts  and  feelings  are  caused  by  the 

activity  of  the  brain,  that  activity  has  been  hard  to  study  because  most  people  don’t  want 

to  hand  over  their  brain  to  science  until  they  are  dead.  We  infer  _______________  by 

seeing  what  the  whole  person  does  when  presented  with  inputs  such  as  pictures,  words,  or 

instructions. 

① what  must  be  doing  of  the  brain  parts
② parts  of  what  must  be  doing  the  brain
③ that  what  brain  parts  must  be  doing
④ what  parts  of  the  brain  must  be  doing   

⑤ that  must  be  doing  parts  of  the  brain 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Questions  3-5:  Choose  the  word  that  best  completes  the  sentence.       

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.  (0.8  points)  When  receiving  an  answer  from  chatbots,  always  remain  __________  and 

question 

the 

incoming 

information.  This 

is 

important  because  AI 

is  prone 

to 

“hallucinations”  (generating  false  information  with  high  confidence).

①  compliant
②  inauthentic
③  naive
④  skeptical
⑤  uncritical                                                                                                                   

-  1  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

4.  (0.8  points)  An  extensive  new  analysis  looks  at  the  environmental  footprint  of  data  centers 

in  the  U.S.  to  get  a  handle  on  what  exactly  the  country  might  be  facing  as  this  buildout 

continues  over  the  next  few  years  and  where  the  U.S.  should  be  building  data  centers  to 

avoid  the  most  harmful  environmental  __________. 

①  benefits     
②  impacts
③  indicators
④  processes
⑤  revelations                                                                                                                       

5.  (0.8  points)  Taylor  Swift  and  Travis  Kelce  announced  their  engagement  on  Instagram, 

calling  themselves  “your  English  teacher  and  your  gym  teacher,”  a  playful  nod  to  the  roles 

fans 

imagine 

them 

in.  Fans’  emotional 

reactions  highlight  parasocial 

relationships,   

one-sided  bonds  people  form  with  celebrities.  Swift  has  cultivated 

these 

ties 

through 

constant  music  releases,  Easter  eggs,  fan  interactions,  and  a  carefully  __________  yet 

authentic  public  image.

①  adhered
②  interrupted   
③  crafted
④  deciphered     
⑤  obscured                                                                                             

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Questions  6-7:  Choose  the  underlined  word  or  phrase  that  must  be  changed  for  the 

sentence  to  be  correct. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.  (1.0  points)  Global  managers  need  feedback  and  rewards  just  as  ①managers  in  the  home 

culture  do.  The  appraisal  and  reward  system  is  different  from  the  home  system  because 

people  doing  overseas  assignments  ②have  to  be  evaluated  and  rewarded  in  the  way  that 

takes  into  account  the  values  of  persons  in  the  host  culture  and  the  expectations  of  a 

particular  assignment.  The  evaluation  criteria  must  be  made  clear.  ③Areas  are  typically 

included  leadership  ability,  interpersonal  skills,  and  achievement  of  organizational  objectives. 

For  international  managers,  ④a  key  factor  to  be  evaluated  often  includes  profits,  but  in 

some  countries,  the  main  goal  might  be  ⑤to  build  a  presence  in  the  country.  In  that  case, 

making  contacts  and  building  close  personal  relationships  with  key  officials  in  the  host 

country  are  important.       

-  2  -

                 
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

7.  (1.0  points)    The  acclaimed  Japanese  director  Akira  Kurosawa,  ①starting  in  the  mid-1930s, 

worked  his  way  up  from  an  assistant  director  at  Toho,  one  of  Japan’s  pre-eminent  studios 

②which  then  called  PCL  Cinema  Studio.  In  subsequent  years,  his  work  would  proudly 

exhibit  a  broad  range  of  influences,  including  several  Shakespearean  adaptations  and  a  film 

based  on  The  Idiot  by  Dostoyevsky,  ③who,  Kurosawa  thought,  “writes  most  honestly  about 

human  existence.”  Kurosawa  translated  his  early  Japanese  success  into  international  interest 

with  films  like  Drunken  Angel  (1948)  and  Stray  Dog  (1949),  and  by  1952,  his  Rashomon 

was  voted 

the  finest  foreign  film  at 

the  24th  Academy  Awards.  ④Buoyed  by 

this 

international  recognition,  Kurosawa  embarked  on  ⑤what  would  become  one  of  his  most 

ambitious  and  enduring  works:  Seven  Samurai. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Questions  8-9:  Choose  the  number  with  the  correct  set  of  statements  that  can  be 

restated  or  inferred  from  the  original  text. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8.  (1.1  points)  An  extensive  study  by  the  Boston  Consulting  Group  (BCG)  identifies  fifty 

firms  in  ten  emerging  economies  as  “local  dynamos.”  According  to  BCG,  a  local  dynamo   

prospers 

in 

its  home  market,  fends  off  multinational  rivals,  and 

is  not  focused  on 

expanding  abroad.  India’s  Amul  farmers’  cooperative  sells  dairy  products  through  a  network 

of  2.8  million  members  supported  by  one  of 

the 

longest-running  and  best-loved  ad 

campaigns  in  India.  Its  ice-cream  and  chocolate  milk  businesses  have  survived  the  entry  of 

Unilever  and  Nestle,  respectively.  Brazilian  budget  airline  Gol  has  targeted  thrifty  Brazilian 

consumers  willing  to  sacrifice  convenience  for  price;  planes  often  depart  at  odd  hours  and 

make  multiple  stops.  According 

to  BCG, 

local  dynamos  often  combine  an 

in-depth 

understanding  of  consumer  tastes  with  cost-effective  production  techniques  to  create  a 

locally  laser-focused  business  model. 

-  3  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

    (a)  The  competitiveness  of  firms  like  Amul  and  Gol  depends  on  global  scale  and 

branding. 

    (b)  BCG  suggests  that  local  dynamos  mainly  use  domestic  success  as  a  foundation  for 

future  international  expansion.

    (c)  Local  dynamos  concentrate  on  strengthening 

their  position  within 

their  home 

countries.

    (d)  Local  dynamos  are  successful  firms  that  dominate  their  domestic  markets  while 

withstanding  competition  from  global  multinational  companies.

① (a)  &  (b)
②  (b)  &  (c) 
③  (c)  &  (d) 
④  (a),  (c)  &  (d)
⑤  (b),  (c)  &  (d) 

9.  (1.1  points)  Fire-making  is  a  uniquely  human  innovation  that  stands  apart  from  other 

complex  behaviors  such  as  tool  production,  symbolic  culture,  and  social  communication. 

Controlled  fire  use  provided  adaptive  opportunities  that  had  profound  effects  on  human 

evolution 

including  warmth,  protection  from  predators,  cooking,  and 

the  creation  of 

illuminated  spaces  that  became  focal  points  for  social  interaction.  Fire  use  developed  over   

a  million  years,  progressing  from  the  harvesting  of  natural  fire  to  its  maintenance  and 

ultimately  to  deliberate  fire-making.  However,  determining  when  and  how  fire  use  evolved 

remains  challenging  because  natural  and  anthropogenic  burning  are  hard  to  distinguish. 

Although  geochemical  methods  have 

improved 

interpretations  of  heated  deposits, 

unequivocal  evidence  of  deliberate  fire-making  has  remained  elusive.

    (a)  Fire-making  technology  likely  enhanced  social  cohesion  by  creating  illuminated  spaces 

that  promoted  social  interaction.

    (b)  The  use  of  fire  simultaneously  contributed  to  multiple  survival  advantages  including 

safety,  nutrition,  and  social  organization.

    (c)  The  development  of  fire-making  represents  a  gradual  technological  process  rather  than 

a  sudden  innovation.

    (d)  Advances 

in  geochemical  analysis  have  made 

it  possible 

to  clearly  distinguish 

intentional  fire-making  from  naturally  occurring  fires  in  the  archaeological  records.

① (a),  (b)  &  (c)     
② (b),  (c)  &  (d) 
③ (a),  (c)  &  (d)
④ (a)  &  (b)  
⑤ (c)                                                           

-  4  -

       
         
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions  10-25:  Read  each  passage  and  answer  the  corresponding  questions  for  each. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

※  Questions  10  through  13  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  On  Mount  Olympus,  sometime  around  800-900  BC,  the  gods  and  goddesses  of  Ancient 

Greece  were  served  sweet  nectar  and  ambrosia  by  Hebe,  the  goddess  of  immortal  youth.  A 
beautiful  young  woman,  Hebe  was  symbolic  of  being 
life.”  Her 
counterpart,  Geras,  the  god  or  spirit  of  old  age,  (a)  was  depicted  as  a  haggard  and 
wrinkled  man,  often  leaning  on  a  walking  stick.  ❶  Instead  of  beauty,  he  represented 
biological  decline  and  the  fear  of  death.  Together,  Hebe  and  Geras  are  just  (b)  one  of  the 
many  representations  of  ageing  in  our  culture  and  history  that  serve  as  a  reminder  that  no 

the  “prime  of 

in 

one  can  escape  the  passing  of  time.

[B]  Humanity’s  obsession  with  youthfulness  has  only  intensified  since  Ancient  Greece.  Our 
skin,  a  living  ecosystem,  is  at  the  center  of  this;  (c)  not  only  is  it  the  largest  organ  in  the 
body,  but  it’s  also  visible.  Or  as  one  group  of  researchers  in  France  put  it,  “social.”  ❷  In 
fact,  in  their  study  of  1,300  people  across  fifty  four  countries,  85%  of  the  participants  felt 

that  their  skin  reflected  their  personality,  suggesting  it  is  tied  in  with  their  sense  of  self. 
the  moment  we  are  born.  The  global 
Much 

like  our  other  organs,  skin  ages  from 

anti-ageing  products  market  size  was  valued  at  approximately  $52  billion  in  2024  and  is 

expected  to  reach  $80  billion  by  2030.  But  why  do  we  try  to  resist  an  ageing  face  and 
how  can  we  embrace  it?

[C]  Our  skin  is  incredible,  really.  ❸  While  only  a  few  millimeters  thick,  it  makes  up 
about  15%  of  our  total  body  weight.  “The  skin  is  a  very  important  organ  (d)  that  we  take 
it  for  granted,  even  though  it’s  the  organ  we  wear  externally,”  says  George  Murphy,  a 

professor  at  Harvard  Medical  School.  “The  skin  protects  us;  it’s  the  major  interface  to  the 

external  environment,  which  is  often  hostile.”  Our  skin  acts  as  a  barrier  from  germs, 
infections,  physical  trauma,  or  anything  else  that  might  harm  us,  like  UV  from  the  sun.   
❹  “It  does  so  many  different  things  that  are  absolutely  critical  to  life,”  Murphy  says.  “If 
you  lose  most  of  your  skin,  usually  that’s  fatal.” 

[D]  Our  skin  ages  both  intrinsically  and  extrinsically.  In  both  cases,  our  collagen  levels   

decrease  and  our  blood  vessels  become  more  fragile.  “What  happens  with  our  skin  when 
we  age  is  that  it  loses  many  of  the  structural  and  functional  components  that  are  designed 
to  protect  us,”  says  Murphy.  ❺  Over  time,  our  stem  cells  start  to  regenerate  at  a  slower 
rate,  which  affects  the  functioning  of  each  of  the  three  layers  of  the  skin:  the  epidermis 
the  dermis  (the  middle  layer),  and  the  subcutis  (made  of  fat  and 
(the  outer  layer), 

connective  tissue).  Essentially,  our  skin  thins,  dries,  and  loses  elasticity.  This  explains  why 

as  we  get  older,  our  skin  is  less  able  to  protect  us;  for  example,  (e)  wounds  take  longer 
to  heal.

-  5  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

10.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  would  be  the  best  title  for  the  passage  above?

① Fashion  Trends  and  Standards  of  Physical  Attractiveness  in  Human  Skin

② Cultural  Meaning  and  the  Aging  of  Human  Skin

③ Cosmetic  Practices  and  the  Rise  of  Global  Beauty  Markets  for  Human  Skin

④ Lifestyle  Choices  and  Environmental  Pollution  in  Human  Skin

⑤ Medical  Disorders  and  Dermatological  Treatments  for  Human  Skin

11.  (1.1  points)  According  to  the  passage  above,  which  of  the  following  is  NOT  true?

① Because  skin  is  visible  to  others,  it  also  carries  social  meaning.

② Anxiety  about  the  invisible  signs  of  ageing  reflects  the  use  of  anti-ageing  products. 

③ Human  cultures  have  long  associated  youth  with  beauty  and  old  age  with  decline.

④ As  people  age,  their  skin  becomes  less  effective  at  protecting  the  body  from  infections.

⑤ Skin  plays  a  central  role  in  how  individuals  perceive  and  present  themselves  to  others.

12.  (1.0  points)  Which  part  must  be  changed  for  the  sentence  to  be  correct?

①  (a)  was  depicted  as  a  haggard  and  wrinkled  man

②  (b)  one  of  the  many  representations

③  (c)  not  only  is  it  the  largest  organ

④  (d)  that  we  take  it  for  granted

⑤  (e)  wounds  take  longer  to  heal     

13.  (1.0  points)  The  following  sentence  is  removed  from  the  passage  above.  In  which  part 

may  it  be  inserted  to  support  the  argument  made  by  the  author? 

  It  also  regulates  our  body  temperature  and  produces  hormones  and  vitamins.

①  ❶ 

②  ❷

③  ❸

④  ❹

⑤  ❺     

-  6  -

 
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

※  Questions  14  through  17  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  Demonstrably  false  claims  about  asylum  seekers  and  other  migrants  in  2024  raced 
across  the  internet  and  prompted  riots,  threats,  and  other  episodes  with  tangible  impacts  on 

immigrant  and  minority  communities.  This  type  of  misinformation  often  exploits  underlying 
anxieties  about  immigration,  the  economy,  and  crime.  The  spread  was  facilitated  by  social 
media,  where  unverified  rumors  can  spread  unchecked.  Most  destructive  were  social-media- 

spread  claims  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  which  the  suspect  in  a  tragic  stabbing  attack  on 
young  girls  in  July  was  a  Muslim  asylum  seeker  who  had  arrived  on  a  small  boat  across 
the  Channel.  In  fact,  the  (a)  alleged  killer  was  a  British  national  born  to  a  church-going 

family  in  Wales.  (b)  Incited  by  the  false  news,  mobs  launched  attacks  on  mosques,  a  hotel 
housing  asylum  seekers,  and  other  facilities,  which  injured  several  police  officers  and 
bystanders.  This  led  to  more  than  100  arrests. 

[B]  The  viral  nature  of  the  misinformation,  in  particular,  is  the  case  on  platforms  such  as 
X,  which  has  become  notably  more  tolerant  of  extremist  voices  since  its  acquisition  by 

Elon  Musk,  a  close  ally  of  Donald  Trump.  Social  media  is  also  allegedly  used  by 

governments  such  as  Russia,  which  have  been  accused  of  sowing  migration-related  lies  to 
cause  instability  and  undermine  geopolitical  opponents.  The  rise  of  artificial  intelligence  is 

also  a  factor,  by  blurring  the  line  between  legitimate  news  organizations  and  websites  that 

generate  pure  fiction.  This  dynamic  reflects  a  distrust  in  institutions  globally,  which  can 
create  fertile  ground  for  untruths  to  blossom.

[C]  Immigration  was  a  major  theme  of  the  U.S.  presidential  election,  where  false  claims 

featured  prominently  and  regularly.  Trump  falsely  claimed,  during  a  debate,  that  Haitian 
immigrants  in  a  small  city  in  Ohio  were  “eating  the  dogs”  and  “eating  the  cats”  of  local 

residents.  In  the  following  days,  schools  and  other  institutions  received  dozens  of  bomb 

threats  that  caused  many  residents  to  live  in  fear  and  prompted  the  city  to  cancel  an 
large  numbers  of 
annual  cultural  event.  Trump  and  his  allies  also  seeded  fears  that 

noncitizens  would  vote  in  the  November  election.  It  has  been  illegal  for  noncitizens  to  vote 

in  U.S.  federal  elections  for  a  century  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  any  meaningful 
number  do  so.

[D]  Many  false  claims  hinged  on  the  notion  that  migrants  were  disproportionately  likely  to 

commit  crimes.  (1)  ___________________________.  Similar  narratives  (c)  underpinned 
in  countries  such  as  Peru,  where  authorities  began  monitoring  (d) 
restrictive  policies 

remittances  that  Venezuelan  migrants  sent  back  to  their  homeland  as  part  of  an  effort  to 

(e)  crack  down  on  crime  and  extortion.  As  elsewhere,  evidence  suggests  that  Venezuelan 
migrants  commit  less  crime  than  the  native  born,  particularly  violent  crime,  relative  to  their 

population  size.

-  7  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

14.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  would  be  the  best  title  for  the  passage  above?

① Misinformation  About  Migrants  and  Its  Consequences
② Public  Attitudes  Toward  Immigration  and  National  Identity
③ Migration  Policies  and  Their  Economic  Impact  on  Host  Countries
④ The  Growth  of  Social  Media  Platforms  on  Global  Political  Campaigns
⑤ Artificial  Intelligence  and  the  Changing  Environment  of  Online  Journalism

15.  (0.8  points)  Which  of  the  following  pairs  includes  an  expression  that  CANNOT  replace 

the  underlined  expression  in  the  passage  above?

①  (a)  alleged,  supposed
② (b)  incited,  triggered
③  (c)  underpinned,  supported 
④  (d)  remittances,  money  sent  home
⑤  (e)  crack  down,  pay  attention  to 

16.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  would  best  fit  in  blank  (1)  in  paragraph  [D]?

① The  claim  circulated  widely  in  European  media  discussions  about  the  economic  impact  of 

immigration  and  asylum  seeking.

②  This  belief  gained  widespread  attention  through  online  debates  about  border  control  and 

national  security.

③  Such  arguments  were  frequently  repeated  by  political  figures  during  debates  on  social     

reforms.

④  This  narrative  reduced  existing  public  discourses  about  migration  in  several  European 

countries.

⑤  A  version  of  this  line  was  linked  to  attacks  on  migrants  in  Portugal  and  echoed  in 

protests  calling  for  stricter  immigration  laws.

17.  (1.1  points)  According  to  the  passage  above,  which  of  the  following  is  true?

①  Evidence  from  multiple  countries  shows  that  migrants  are  more  likely  than  native-born 

citizens  to  commit  violent  crimes.

② False  claims  about  migrants  spread  online  have  led  to  real-world  violence,  fear,  and  policy 

responses  in  several  countries.

③ The  stabbing  attack  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  confirmed  to  have  been  carried  out  by  a   

recently  arrived  Muslim  asylum  seeker.

④  Authorities  in  Peru  began  monitoring  migrant  remittances  mainly  to  support  migrants’ 

economic  integration.

⑤ Noncitizens  are  legally  allowed  to  vote  in  U.S.  federal  elections  if  they  have  lived  in  the 

country  for  a  sufficient  period  of  time.

-  8  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

※  Questions  18  through  21  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  Why  do  some  people  seem  endlessly  curious,  while  others  prefer  the  comfort  of  the 

familiar?  We  often  think  of  curiosity  as  a  stable  personality  trait,  part  of  what  makes 

each  person  unique.  Yet  recent  evidence  suggests  it  may  be  far  more  flexible  and 

adaptive  than  we  realize.  A  new  study  in  Evolutionary  Behavioral  Sciences  argues  that 

curiosity  evolves  and 

(a) 

fluctuates  with  our  environment.  From  an  evolutionary 

perspective,  curiosity  is  not  just  a  drive  to  seek  (b)  novelty;  it’s  a  strategy  shaped  by 

the  costs  and  benefits  of  exploration.

[B]  For  both  humans  and  animals,  curiosity  serves  an  ancient  function:  it  motivates 

information  seeking.  Exploring  new  places,  learning  how  things  work,  or  understanding 

others’  behaviors  all  provide  knowledge  that  can  improve  survival  and  reproduction.  But 

exploration  also  involves  risk.  Searching  for  something  new  consumes  time  and  energy 

and  may  expose  one  to  failure  or  harm.  Behavioral  ecology  predicts  that  exploration 

should  therefore  vary  with  environmental  conditions.  In  secure,  resource-rich  contexts,  the 

cost  of  failure  is  low  while  the  long-term  benefits  of  information  are  high.  In  contrast, 

in  unpredictable  or  harsh  environments,  curiosity  can  be  costly;  the  safest  strategy  is 

often  to  stick  to  what  already  works. 

[C]  A  study  tested  this  idea  using  data  from  962  U.S.  adults.  Participants  completed  a 

comprehensive  measure  of  curiosity,  covering  five  (c)  dimensions:  joyous  exploration, 

deprivation  sensitivity,  stress  tolerance,  social  curiosity,  and  thrill-seeking.  The  researchers 

also  measured  participants’  socioeconomic  status 

(SES),  both  current  and  during 

childhood,  as  a  (d)  proxy  for  resource  availability.  The  results  were  remarkably 

consistent:  Higher  current  SES  predicted  higher  curiosity  across  all  five  dimensions. 

People  who  felt  more  financially  secure  reported  being  more  curious,  more  open  to 

uncertainty,  and  more  willing  to  take  intellectual  or  social  risks.  Childhood  SES,  in 

contrast,  showed  little  effect.  This  suggests  that  curiosity  is  not  fixed  early  in  life,  but 

remains  flexible,  responding  dynamically  to  current  ecological  conditions.

[D]  The  researchers  interpret  curiosity  as  a  form  of  phenotypic  plasticity,  a  behavioral 

flexibility  that  allows  individuals  to  adjust  to  their  environments.  Rather  than  being  a 

fixed  trait,  curiosity  may  act  as  (1)  a  cognitive  thermostat,  turning  up  when  conditions 

are  stable  and  safe,  and  turning  down  when  uncertainty  or  (e)  scarcity  makes  exploration 

costly.  The  same  pattern  appears  across  the  animal  kingdom.  Primates,  birds,  and  even 

bees  explore  more  in  safe,  resource-rich  settings.  When  energy  reserves  are  high,  the 

potential 

rewards  of  exploration  outweigh 

the 

risks.  Our  curiosity  expands  when 

conditions  allow  for  it  and  contracts  when  life  demands  caution.

-  9  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

18.  (1.1  points)  According 

to 

the  passage  above,  why  does  behavioral  ecology  predict 

variations  in  exploratory  behavior?

①  Because  the  cognitive  cost  of  curiosity  differs  across  species

② Because  social  learning  reduces  the  need  for  individual  exploration 

③ Because  curiosity  is  genetically  programmed  to  fluctuate  over  time

④  Because  exploration  increases  reproductive  success  regardless  of  context

⑤  Because  environmental  conditions  alter  the  balance  between  risk  and  reward                 

19.  (1.1  points)  What  does  the  metaphor  of  (1)  a  cognitive  thermostat  in  paragraph  [D] 

primarily  emphasize  about  curiosity?         

①  Curiosity  can  be  understood  as  a  form  of  behavioral  adaptation.

②  Curiosity  operates  automatically  without  conscious  awareness  of  its  effects.

③  Curiosity  increases  steadily  as  individuals  accumulate  knowledge  and  experience.

④  Curiosity  is  regulated  by  neurological  mechanisms  similar  to  temperature  control.

⑤  Curiosity  adjusts  flexibly  in  response  to  environmental  safety  and  resource  conditions.   

20.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  statements  is  most  consistent  with  the  logic  of  the 

passage  above?

①  Curiosity  carries  evolutionary  costs  that  may  outweigh  its  benefits  in  some  contexts.

② Individuals  in  unpredictable  environments  benefit  most  from  exploratory  behavior.

③ Socioeconomic  status  determines  curiosity  in  a  deterministic  manner.

④  High  curiosity  is  advantageous  only  in  childhood  and  adolescence.

⑤  Curiosity  evolved  because  it  maximizes  survival  outcomes.         

21.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  pairs  includes  an  expression  that  CANNOT  replace 

the  underlined  expression  in  the  passage  above? 

①  (a)  fluctuates,  immerses

②  (b)  novelty,  innovation

③  (c)  dimensions,  scopes

④  (d)  proxy,  substitution

⑤  (e)  scarcity,  insufficiency

-  10  -

                                 
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

※  Questions  22  through  25  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  “Get  your  eight  hours.”  It’s  a  command  so  familiar  it  feels  timeless—an  unquestioned 
truth  that  humans  naturally  need  a  full  night’s  sleep.  Yet  historical  evidence  suggests  that 

even  something  as  basic  as  sleep  has  been  shaped  by  time,  culture,  and  social  organization. 

For  much  of  recorded  history,  humans  have  actually  slept  eight  hours,  but  in  two  distinct 

phases  of  approximately  four  hours  each.  As  Roger  Ekirch  uncovered  through  a  historical 

study  of  literature,  art,  and  diaries,  people  would  once  head  to  bed  when  it  got  dark,  sleep 

for  four  hours,  wake  for  a  while,  and  then  slide  into  a  “second  sleep”  for  another  four 

hours. 

[B]  This  segmented  form  of  sleep,  however,  began  to  fade  as  nighttime  itself  underwent  a 

social  transformation.  As  artificial  lighting  became  more  affordable,  evenings  were  no 

longer  defined  by  darkness  and  danger.  By 

the  18th  century,  European  cities  had 

introduced  public  street  lighting,  making  it  safer  and  more  acceptable  to  move  about  after 

dark.  The  night  gradually  shifted  from  a 

time  associated  with  risk  and  rest 

to  one 

increasingly  open  to  social  activity.  In  the  United  States,  gas  and  later  electric  lighting 

further  extended  productive  and  social 

life 

into 

the  evening,  delaying  bedtime  and 

compressing  the  two  sleep  phases  into  a  single  stretch. 

[C]  It  was  industrialization  that  solidified  the  single  sleep  as  a  social  norm.  Especially  in 

the  cities  that  increasingly  (a)  revolved  around  factory  production,  a  newly  formalized 

workday  structured  daily  life,  and  a  fascination  with  productivity  meant  that  spending  hours 

lolling  around  in  the  middle  of  the  night  was  considered  (b)  slothful.  School  schedules  also 

became  increasingly  standardized,  and  as  early  as  the  1820s,  parenting  books  advised 

promptly  (c)  weaning  children  from  the  two-sleep  pattern.  By  the  late  19th  century  in  the 

United  States,  school  attendance  was  (d)  compulsory,  creating  yet  another  cultural  pressure 

to  conform  to  this  new  sleeping  schedule. 

[D]  Technological  developments  further  reinforced  this  shift  toward  regulated,  single-cycle 

sleep.  Although  clocks  had  existed  since  the  ancient  world,  the  invention  of  the  mechanical 
alarm  clock  in  the  late  18th  century  marked  a  new  relationship  between  sleep  and  labor.  By 
the  late  19th  century,  mass-produced  alarm  clocks  were  embraced  by  a  society  required  to 
adjust  its  biological  rhythms  to  the  industrial  clock.  Sleep  was  no  longer  something  that 

followed  natural  cycles  but  something  that  had  to  be  regulated,  timed,  and  optimized.  The 

changing  cultural  meaning  of  sleep  is  also  (e)  evident  in  attitudes  toward  wakefulness.  In 

earlier  periods,  being  awake  at  night  could  be  seen  as  useful  or  even  virtuous.  But  by  the 

late  19th  century,  insomnia,  defined  as  the  inability  to  sleep  restfully  through  a  single  sleep 

cycle,  had  been  categorized  as  a  disorder,  signaling 

the  end  of 

the  era  of 

the 

unproblematic  segmented  sleep. 

-  11  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

22.  (1.0  points)  According  to  paragraph  [B],  which  of  the  following  is  most  accurate  about 

artificial  lighting?

①  Artificial 

lighting 

is  presented  as  a 

technological 

innovation 

that 

improved  urban 

concentration.

②  Artificial  lighting  is  presented  as  a  cultural  symbol  of  economic  modernization.
③  Artificial  lighting  is  presented  as  a  factor  that  altered  the  use  of  the  nighttime.
④  Artificial  lighting  is  presented  as  an  example  of  industrial  efficiency  applied  to  daily  life.
⑤  Artificial  lighting  is  presented  as  a  cause  of  declining  physical  health  in  urban  populations.   

23.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  best  describes  the  primary  function  of  paragraph  [C] 

in  the  passage  above?

①  It  challenges  earlier  claims  about  the  impact  of  artificial  lighting  on  nighttime  behavior.
②  It  explains  technological  developments  that  directly  caused  changes  in  sleep  patterns.
③  It  shows  how  institutional  and  social  norms  consolidated  single  sleep  as  a  standard.

④  It  emphasizes  individual  choice  as  the  primary  driver  of  sleep  behavior.
⑤  It  describes  a  return  to  premodern  biological  rhythms  of  sleep.                           

24.  (0.8  points)  Which  of  the  following  pairs  includes  an  expression  that  CANNOT  replace 

the  underlined  expression  in  the  passage  above? 

①  (a)  revolved,  centered
②  (b)  slothful,  lazy
③  (c)  weaning,  gradual  separation
④  (d)  compulsory,  optional
⑤  (e)  evident,  apparent

25.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  questions  is  most  directly  addressed  by  the  passage 

above?

①  Why  did  biphasic  sleep  patterns  prove  less  efficient  than  single-cycle  sleep  in  industrial 

societies?

②  How  did  advances  in  sleep  science  overturn  long-standing  biological  theories  about  human 

rest?

③  To  what  extent  can  modern  sleep  disorders  be  attributed 

to  artificial 

lighting  and 

urbanization?

④  Is  uninterrupted  eight-hour  sleep  biologically  optimal  for  humans  across  all  historical 

periods?

⑤  How  have  historical,  social,  and  technological  changes  shaped  what  is  considered  “normal” 

human  sleep?                 

-  12  -

                         
                                 
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

※  문제  26  –  48

물음에  답하세요.

[26]  [0.8점]  다음  중  cos sin



를  간단히  한  것을  고르세요.


①  




②  




③ 




④ 




⑤ 



[27]  [1.0점]  를   에  대한  함수라  할  때,  음함수        가  점     를  지난다. 

다음  중  옳은  것을  고르세요. 


①   에서  

②   에서  

③   에서  

④   에서  

⑤   에서  

   이고,  곡선은  아래로  볼록이다.

   이고,  곡선은  위로  볼록이다.

   이고,  곡선은  아래로  볼록이다.

   이고,  곡선은  위로  볼록이다.

   이고,  곡선은  위로  볼록이다.

[28]  [1.0점]       ln   로  정의된  함수   의  역함수를     라  할  때,     ′   의  값을 

구하세요. 


①  


② 


③ 

④  

⑤ 

[29]  [0.8점]  모든    에  대해,  <아래>  식을  만족하는  함수   에  따른   를  구하세요.

< 아래 >

 





  



  

    ① 

② 

③ 

④ 

⑤ 

-  13  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

[30]  [1.0점]  <보기>의  무한급수  내용들  중  옳은  것은  모두  몇  개입니까? 

< 보기 >

    

  

은  조건부  수렴(conditionally  convergent)한다.

    

  

  

은  조건부  수렴(conditionally  convergent)한다.

  cos 

  

은  발산(divergent)한다.

    




sin

 은  절대  수렴(absolutely  convergent)한다.

∞

  

  

∞

  

  

∞

  

  

∞

  

  

가.

나.

다.

라.

① 개

② 개

③ 개

④ 개

⑤ 개

[31]  [1.0점]  <아래>  함수에  대하여    에서의  미분계수   ′  의  값을  구하세요.

< 아래 >

    arctan  






①  


②  

③ 


④ 


⑤ 

[32]  [0.8점]  <아래>  극한을  구하세요. 

< 아래 >

lim
 → 

sinh

  sin  cos

① 발산


② 


③ 


④  


⑤ 

-  14  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

[33]  [1.1점]  <보기>에서  수렴하는  이상  적분(improper  integral)은  모두  몇  개입니까?

∞

가. 



 ln  

  



다. 



cos 


  

< 보기 >

나.



  




sin





라. 



 sin    

① 개

② 개

③ 개

④ 개

⑤ 개

[34]  [1.0점]       과    으로  유계된  영역을  직선    를  중심으로  회전시킬  때  생기는  입

체의  부피를  구하세요. 


① 




② 




③ 



④ 


⑤ 



[35]  [1.0점]  실수  에  대하여          






 








 
라  하자.  여기서,   는  를  넘지  않는 


가장  큰  정수를  의미한다.  <아래>  식을  만족하는  유리수     에  대하여       를 

구하세요. 

< 아래 >







         

①  

②  

③ 

④ 

⑤ 

[36]  [1.0점]  극한값  lim
 → 

ln      




  

 의  값을  구하세요.

을  만족하는  최소  차수의  다항식   에  대해 


① 


② 


③ 


④ 


⑤ 

-  15  -

   
   
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

[37]  [1.1점]  <아래>  극한을  구하세요. 

< 아래 >

  





sin

 
 



 → ∞ 
lim

  

① 발산

② 


③ 


④ 


⑤ 


[38]  [1.1점]  <아래>  이상  적분을  구하세요.

< 아래 >








  




① 


② 


③ 

④ 

⑤ 발산

[39]  [1.0점]  <아래>  적분을  구하세요. 

< 아래 >













  

 


① 

ln


② 

ln


③ 

ln

④ ln

⑤ 

[40]  [1.0점]  극좌표  방정식      cos    ≤  ≤  로  주어진  곡선의  길이를  구하세요. 

① 

② 

③ 

④ 

⑤ 

-  16  -

2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

[41]  [1.0점]  평면  상의  영역       ≤  ≤   ≤  ≤ 모양의  얇은  판(lamina)이  있다. 
임의의  점에서  밀도가  축으로부터의  거리와  같다고  할  때,  이  얇은  판의  질량을  구하세요.


① 

② 


③ 


④ 

⑤ 

[42]  [1.0점]  수열  이  이  짝수이면       ,  이  홀수이면            으로 

정의되었을  때,  <아래>  무한급수의  합을  구하세요.

< 아래 >

∞



  



 

  
① 

   
② 

   
③ 

   
④ 

  
⑤ 

[43]  [1.0점]  <아래>  적분을  구하세요. 

< 아래 >

   










  



   

 





    

 

① 


② 


③ 


④ 


⑤ 

[44]  [1.1점]  <아래>  두  직선   ,     사이의  최단거리를  구하세요.

< 아래 >

 :


  


 

 :

       


① 


② 

③ 


④ 

⑤ 

-  17  -

   
   
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 


[45]  [1.0점]  곡선    

ln 
 

 ≤  ≤ 를  축을  중심으로  회전시켜  얻은  회전곡면의  넓이를 

구하세요.


① 




② 




③ 




④ 




⑤ 



[46]  [1.1점]  입체  는  구        의  안쪽에  있고,  원뿔    

     의  아래쪽에  놓여 

있다.  <아래>  삼중적분을  구하세요. 

< 아래 >





 


① 

②  


③  

④ 

⑤ 

[47]  [1.1점]  -평면의  곡선  는  아래  그림과  같이  인접한  두  점  사이의  거리를  지름으로  하는  세 

개의  반원으로  이루어져  있고,  방향은  그림과  같이  주어졌다.  선적분  

 



  값을  구하세요.


①   

② 

③   

④   

⑤   

-  18  -

   
   
2026학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

[48]  [1.0점]  함수            는      (가)    개의  임계점을  가지며,  그  중  극대점은             
  (나)    개,  극소점은      (다)    개이고,  모든  안장점(saddle  point)에서의  함수값의  합은    (라)   

이다.  (가),  (나),  (다),  (라)의  합을  구하세요.

① 

② 

③ 

④ 

⑤ 

※  문제  49  –  50

그림과  같이,   ∪∪ 는  닫힌  곡선으로서,   과   는  각각  축과  축  위의  선분이
고,   는  포물선       의  호(arc)로  주어진다.  이  때,   ≤  ≤ 이며,  곡선의  방향은  반시
계방향이다. 

[49]  [1.0점]  <아래>  선적분을  구하세요. 

< 아래 >



    tan      



① 


② 


③  


④  

⑤ 

[50]  [1.0점]  [49]번의  결과를  이용하여,  <아래>  선적분을  구하세요.

< 아래 >



∪

    tan      


①  


② 

③ 


④ 


⑤  

-  19  -

   

===== 9aa26904-2025______________________________.pdf =====
2025학년도 

아주대학교  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

인문계열

성        명

전        형

수험번호

  2025학년도  아주대학교  편입학  수강능력시험

표지를  제외한  페이지  수:  24 

 
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

Questions  1-5:  Choose  the  word  that  best  completes  the  sentence. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

1.  (0.8  points)  In  a  study  published  in  the  Journal  of  Melittology,  an  international  research 

team  examined  the  heat  tolerance  of  bees  and  flies  across  tropical  and  subtropical  regions 

in  the  Americas.  They  found  that  rising  temperatures  pose  a  greater  ________  to  flies  than 

bees,  as  bees  tolerate  higher  temperatures  and  occupy  a  wider  range  of  habitats.   

①  aspiration

②  condition

③  question

④  relief

⑤  threat                                                                                                                         

2.  (0.8  points)  Sherlock  Holmes,  the  fictional  sleuth  who  famously  resides  on  Baker  Street,  is 

known  for  his  impressive  powers  of  logical  ________.  With  a  quick  visual  sweep  of  a 

crime  scene,  he  generates  hypotheses,  gathers  observations  and  draws 

inferences 

that 

ultimately  reveal  the  responsible  criminal's  methods  and  identity.

①  decision

②  decoding

③  reasoning

④  reminiscing

⑤  resolution                                                                                               

3.  (0.8  points)  A  digital  footprint―sometimes  called  a  digital  shadow  or  an  electronic 

footprint―refers  to  the  ________  of  data  you  leave  when  using  the  internet.  It  includes 

websites  you  visit,  emails  you  send,  and  information  you  submit  online.  A  digital  footprint 

can  be  used  to  track  a  person’s  online  activities  and  devices. 

①  content

②  list

③  pattern

④  trail

⑤  volume                                                                                                                     

-  1  -

                                                     
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

4.  (0.8  points)  Josephine  Garis  Cochran  invented  the  first  modern  dishwasher  in  the  1880s. 

Unlike  previous  attempts  at  dishwashing  machines,  which  used  scrubbers  on  the  dishes, 

Cochran’s  machine  cleaned  dishes  with  water  pressure.  Cochran  founded  her  own  company 

to  manufacture  and  sell  her  invention,  and  continuously  improved  it.  After  her  death,  the 

KitchenAid  brand  acquired  her  company  and  used  her  ________  to  build  and  sell  its 

dishwashers.

①  patents

②  patients

③  patrons

④  patterns

⑤  potent                                                                                               

5.  (0.8  points)  In  literature,  as  in  life,  people  often  see  growth,  change,  and  ________  conflict 

carried  out  in  a  single  character.  The  term  one-dimensional  character  in  a  book  review  or 

story  refers  to  a  character  who  lacks  depth  and  who  never  seems  to  learn  or  grow.  When 

a  character  is  one-dimensional,  he  or  she  does  not  demonstrate  a  sense  of  learning  in  the 

course  of  a  story.  Authors  may  use  such  a  character  to  highlight  a  certain  trait;  usually,  it 

is  an  undesirable  one.

①  imminent

②  indifferent 

③  individual

④  internal

⑤  interpersonal                                                                                                                                           

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions  6-10:  Choose  the  expression  that  best  fits  the  sentence. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.  (1.0  points)  The  researcher’s  findings  _______________  the  validity  of  the  existing  model, 

prompting  further  inquiry  into  its  assumption.

①  build  upon

②  call  into  question 

③  draw  upon

④  shed  light  on

⑤ take  part  with

-  2  -

                                                                                                                                                     
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

7.  (1.1  points)  The  policy  framework  was  _______________  to  provide  flexibility  for  future 

technological  advancements.

①  consisted  of 

②  dismissed  as

③  centered  around

④  pushed  against

⑤ put  in  place

8.  (1.0  points)  The  policy  changes,  _______________  a  more  equitable  system,  have  been 

welcomed  by  the  public.

①  because  of

②  getting  ahead  of

③  lending  support  to

④  resulting  in

⑤  standing  apart  from 

9.  (1.0  points)  The  team’s  innovative  strategy  _______________  new  possibilities  for  treating 

chronic  diseases.

①  breaks  into

②  derives  from

③  narrows  down

④  opens  up 

⑤  stands  against

10.  (1.1  points)  The  newly  proposed  hypothesis  _______________  established 

theoretical 

frameworks  and  accumulated  empirical  evidence  in  the  field  of  cognitive  science.

①  allows  for

②  gives  rise  to   

③  is  consistent  with   

④  revolves  around

⑤  sets  up

-  3  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions  11-14:  Choose  the  underlined  word  or  phrase  that  must  be  changed  for  the 
sentence  to  be  correct. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

11.  (1.0  points)  ①If  you  are  a  perfectionist,  you  are  probably  familiar  with  the  feeling  of 

wanting  to  get  everything  just  right.  You  ②may  struggle  with  handing  in  papers,  agonize 

over  projects  ③at  work,  and  even  worry  about  small  errors  from  the  past.  High  standards 

are  one  thing,  but  perfectionism  is  quite  ④other.  ⑤As  some  researchers  have  discovered, 

pursuing  perfection  can  have  serious  consequences  to  both  mental  and  physical  well-being.   

12.  (1.1  points)  Emoji,  though  simple  in  form,  have  emerged  as  a  universal  language  that 

transcends  linguistic  barriers,  enabling  global  communication.  This  phenomenon  is  evident 

on  Instagram,  where  ①nearly  40%  of  captions  contain  emoji,  ②rising  to  over  63%  in 

countries  like  Finland.  As  emoji  use  grows,  Internet  slang  like  “Lol”  ③has  been  declined, 

suggesting  a  correlation  between  the  two.  Instagram  engineer  Thomas  Dimson  notes  that 

emoji  now  offer  a  near-universal  means  of  expression.  ④Despite  a  limit  of  around  700 

characters,  users  creatively  combine  emoji  to  convey  sentiments.  Instagram’s  success  itself 

reflects  this  visual  communication  ⑤with  images  often  replacing  text  as  a  powerful 

expressive  tool.

13.  (1.0  points)  A  study  revealed 

that  remote  work  has 

impacted  people’s  social  and 

communication  skills.  With  78%  ①having  worked  remotely,  four 

in 

ten 

individuals 

reported  their  social  skills  declined  due  to  the  lack  of  in-person  interactions.  ②Not  only 

do 

remote  workers  communicate  ③fewer 

than  4.2 

times  weekly  but 

this 

limited 

interaction  also  hinders 

the  development  of  both  verbal  and  written  skills.  Younger 

employees,  particularly  those  aged  16  to  24,  ④were  most  affected  with  52%  noticing  a 

decline  in  their  ability  to  connect  effectively.  While  written  skills  improved  in  some  cases, 

verbal  skills,  including  public  speaking  and  active  listening,  suffered  considerably.  Many 

companies  ⑤are  considering  to  implement  strategic  training  programs  to  help  employees 

regain  these  essential  soft  skills  as  they  transition  back  to  the  office  environment.

-  4  -

 
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

14.  (1.1  points)  Reading,  like  writing,  is  a  creative  activity  ①through  which  a  reader  can 

construct  meanings.  When  you  read  any  text,  you  do  not  merely  take  meaning  from  it  by 

recognizing  the  signs.  The  purpose  of  reading  is  not  merely  to  “get  the  facts”  or 

“remember  what  you  read.”  To  read  is  ②to  make  what  you  read  your  own  by  seeing 

relationships  between  what  you  already  know  and  the  new  information  that  you  encounter 

as  you  read.  That  is,  what  you  have  already  thought  and  experienced  ③interact  with  what 

you  discover  in  the  text.  The  most  effective  beginning  of  this  process  is  recalling  what 

you  know  about  a  subject  before  you  even  begin  to  read  the  new  material.  Reading  is 

not  the  neat,  orderly  process  it  seems  to  be  ④when  you  look  at  words  marching  across 

white  pages.  Reading  involves  thinking  about  ⑤what  has  been  and  what  will  be;  it 

involves  going  forward  and  going  backward.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Questions  15-18:  Choose  the  number  with  the  correct  set  of  statements  that  can  be 

restated  or  inferred  from  the  original  text. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

15.  (1.1  points)  A  schema  is  a  cognitive  structure  that  serves  as  a  framework  for  one’s 

knowledge  about  people,  places,  objects,  and  events.  Schemas  help  people  organize  their 

knowledge  of  the  world  and  understand  new  information.  While  these  mental  shortcuts  are 

useful  in  helping  us  make  sense  of  the  large  amount  of  information  we  encounter  on  a 

daily  basis,  they  can  also  narrow  our  thinking  and  result  in  stereotypes.

(a)  People  rely  on  schemas  to  process  unfamiliar  or  complex  information  more  quickly.

(b)  Mental  shortcuts  known  as  schemas  can  shape  our  understanding  of  new  information 

based  on  existing  knowledge.

(c)  People  without  schemas  are  better  at  understanding  new  information.

(d)  Schemas  ensure  that  people  assess  new  information  with  objectivity.

①  (a)  &  (b)

②  (b)  &  (c) 

③  (a)  &  (c) 

④  (a),  (b)  &  (d)

⑤  (b),  (c)  &  (d)                                                                                         

-  5  -

 
       
 
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

16.  (1.1  points)  Memory  is  a  vital  cognitive  function  enabling  humans  to  encode,  store,  and 

retrieve  information.  The  encoding  stage  transforms  sensory  input  into  a  form  that  can  be 

stored,  influenced  by  factors  like  focus  and  the  emotional  or  contextual  significance  of  the 

material.  Stored  memories  are  classified  as  short-term  or 

long-term,  with 

long-term 

memory  offering  greater  stability  through  a  consolidation  process  where  memories  are 

reinforced  and  strengthened.  Retrieval,  the  act  of  recalling  stored  information,  depends  on 

effective  cues  and  can  be  hindered  by  interference  or  decay.  Memory  retention  and  recall 

can  also  be  enhanced  by  strategies  like  spaced  repetition,  contextual  associations,  and 

emotional  engagement.

    (a)  Memory  is  a  multi-stage  process  involving  the  transformation,  storage,  and  retrieval 

of  information.

    (b)  Long-term  memory  requires  active  recall  to  remain  accessible,  whereas  short-term 

memory  does  not.

    (c)  Emotional  experiences  can  strengthen  the  encoding  process,  making  memories  easier 

to  retain  and  recall.

    (d)  Retention  is  not  solely  dependent  on  effective  cues  for  recall  but  can  be  actively 

improved  through  deliberate  techniques.

① (a)  &  (b)        

② (a)  &  (c) 

③ (b)  &  (d) 

④ (a),  (c)  &  (d) 

⑤ (b),  (c)  &  (d)             

-  6  -

     
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

17.  (1.1  points)  Researchers  have  found  that  certain  animals,  including  dolphins,  elephants, 

and  some  primates,  exhibit  behaviors 

indicative  of  self-awareness.  These  behaviors 

involve  recognizing 

themselves 

in  mirrors  and  responding  differently 

to 

their  own 

reflections  compared  to  those  of  other  animals.  For  example,  they  may  use  a  mirror  to 

inspect  parts  of  their  bodies  that  they  cannot  see  directly.  This  is  a  behavior  unique  to 

species  with  advanced  cognitive  abilities.  Self-awareness  is  regarded  as  a  hallmark  of 

higher  intelligence,  which  is  rarely  observed  in  the  animal  kingdom.  This  discovery 

challenges  the  long-standing  assumption  that  self-awareness  and  similar  cognitive  traits 

are  uniquely  human,  opening  new  discussions  on  animal  intelligence.

(a)  The  discovery  of  self-awareness  in  animals  suggests  that  human  cognitive  abilities 

may  not  be  entirely  unique.

(b)  Self-awareness  is  seen  as  a  key  indicator  of  advanced  cognitive  abilities  observed 

in  only  a  few  animal  species.

(c)  Animal  behaviors  and  cognitive  traits  have  not  been  widely  researched  until  the 

discovery  of  self-awareness  in  certain  species.

(d)  The  observation  of  self-awareness  in  animals  has  led  to  deeper  understanding  into 

the  complexity  and  diversity  of  animal  intelligence.

① (a)  &  (b)

② (b)  &  (c) 

③ (a),  (b)  &  (d) 

④ (a),  (c)  &  (d)

⑤ (b),  (c)  &  (d)     

-  7  -

       
 
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

18.  (1.1  points)  Culture  is  a  term  that  refers  to  a  large  and  diverse  set  of  mostly  intangible 

aspects  of  social  life.  According  to  sociologists,  culture  consists  of  the  values,  beliefs, 

systems  of  language,  communication,  and  practices  that  people  share  in  common  and  that 

can  be  used  to  define  them  as  a  collective.  Culture  also  includes  the  material  objects  that 

are  common  to  that  group  or  society.  Culture 

is  distinct  from  social  structure  and 

economic  aspects  of  society,  but  it  is  connected  to  them―both  continuously  informing 

them  and  being  informed  by  them.  Common  cultures  include  those  shaped  by  regional 

traditions,  religious  beliefs,  and  historical  experiences. 

(a)  Culture  encompasses  not  only  intangible  aspects  but  also  the  material  objects  that  a 

group  or  society  holds  in  common.

(b)  Although  it  differs  from  social  structure  and  economic  aspects,  culture  continuously 

interacts  with  them.

(c)  A  shared  language  system  can  fully  determine  a  group’s  cultural  identity.

(d)  Cultural  practices  serve  as  markers  that  can  distinguish  one  collective  from  another.

①  (a)  &  (b)

②  (a)  &  (c) 

③  (a),  (b)  &  (d)

④  (a),  (c)  &  (d)

⑤  (b),  (c)  &  (d)         

-  8  -

       
 
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions  19-50:  Read  each  passage  and  answer  the  corresponding  questions  for  each. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
※ Questions  19  through  22  are  based  on  the  following  passage. 

[A]  When  it  comes  to  global  mass  marketing,  few  companies  can  rival  the  (a)  prowess  of 

Coca-Cola.  Recognized  as 

the  most 

iconic  and  best-selling  soft  drink 

in  history, 

Coca-Cola’s    dominance  is  underscored  by  its  annual  marketing  budget  of  nearly  $3  billion 

and  (b)  revenues  exceeding  $30  billion.  Consistently 

topping 

the 

interbrand  rankings, 

Coca-Cola  holds  a  current  brand  value  of  $68  billion  with  its  ubiquitous  presence  in  over 
200  countries  making  it  the  best-known  product  in  the  world.  ❶       

[B]  The  history  of  Coke’s  success  is  nothing  short  of  extraordinary.  The  drink  was 

formulated  in  1886  by  Dr.  John  S.  Pemberton,  who  mixed  a  syrup  of  his  own  invention 

with  carbonated  water,  initially  as  a  remedy  for  headaches.  The  company’s  first  president, 

Asa  Griggs  Candler,  later  turned  the  product  into  a  pop  culture  phenomenon  by  pioneering 

innovative  marketing  strategies.  His  use  of  branded  (c)  paraphernalia―ranging  from  clocks 

to  posters―cemented  Coca-Cola’s  place  in  consumers’  daily  lives  and  integrated  it  into 
popular  culture.  ❷ 

[C]  From  its  inception,  Coca-Cola  recognized  that  the  brand  should  foster  emotional  and 

social  connections  with  the  masses  to  gain  worldwide  success.  The  company  adopted  the 

philosophy  of  making 
the  company 
prioritized  expansive  distribution  networks  and  strove  to  make  the  product  loved  by  all.  ❸ 

the  product  “within  arm’s 

length  of  desire.”  So 

A  testament  to  this  strategy  was  its  initiative  during  World  War  II:  promising  that  “every 

man  in  uniform  gets  a  bottle  of  Coca-Cola  for  5  cents,  wherever  he  is,  and  whatever  it 

costs 

the  company.”  This  approach  not  only 

introduced 

the  beverage 

to 

international 

markets  but  also  cultivated  a  positive  brand  association  in  a  time  of  (d)  turmoil.   

[D]  What  distinguishes  Coca-Cola  from  its  competitors  is  its  unparalleled  ability  to  craft 

uplifting  global  campaigns  that  transcend  linguistic  and  cultural  boundaries.  Coca-Cola’s 

marketing  has  consistently  emphasized 
thirst  while 
connecting  individuals  from  diverse  walks  of  life.  ❹  Andy  Warhol  said  it  best,  “A  Coke 

the  product’s  ability 

to  quench 

is  a  Coke  and  no  amount  of  money  can  get  you  a  better  Coke  than  the  bum  on  the 

corner  is  drinking.”  One  of  Coca-Cola’s  most  memorable  commercials,  “Hilltop,”  released 

in  1971,  exemplifies  this  sentiment.  Featuring  young  adults  from  all  over  the  world  united 

on  a  hillside  in  Italy,  the  ad  celebrated  harmony  and  universal  (e)  camaraderie  through  the 

song  “I’d  like  to  buy  the  world  a  Coke.”  The  commercial  touched  so  many  consumers 

emotionally  and  so  effectively  showed  the  worldwide  appeal  of  Coke  that  the  song  became 
a  top-ten  hit,  further  solidifying  Coca-Cola’s  Global  appeal.  ❺

-  9  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

19.  (1.1  points)  Which  statement  best  summarizes  the  main  idea  of  the  passage  above? 

① Coca-Cola’s  success  lies  in  its  marketing  strategies  and  emotional  branding.

②  Coca-Cola’s  focus  on  product  development  has  ensured  its  global  dominance. 

③ Coca-Cola's  advertising  campaigns  are  universally  resonant  and  culturally  localized.               

④ Coca-Cola  is  the  best-selling  soft  drink  globally,  supported  by  the  success  of  a  logo  song.

⑤  Coca-Cola  has  established  itself  as  a  global  brand  through  innovation  and  perseverance.   

20.  (0.8  points)  Which  of  the  following  pairs  includes  an  expression  that  CANNOT  replace 

the  underlined  expression  in  the  passage  above?   

① (a)  prowess  ―  supremacy

② (b)  revenues  ―  profits   

③ (c)  paraphernalia  ―  merchandise

④ (d)  turmoil  ―  instability 

⑤ (e)  camaraderie  ―  courage 

21.  (1.0  points)  The  following  sentence  is  removed  from  the  passage.  In  which  part  may  it 

be  inserted  to  support  the  argument  made  by  the  author?

  In  fact,  Coca-Cola 
understood  word  in  the  world  (after  okay). 

is  such  a  global  phenomenon 

that 

its  name 

is 

the  second-most 

① ❶ 

② ❷

③ ❸

④ ❹

⑤ ❺

22.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  NOT  part  of  Coca-Cola’s  marketing  strategies?

①  Crafting  globally  resonant  campaigns  that  transcend  cultural  and  linguistic  barriers.

②  Distributing  branded  paraphernalia  to  promote  the  brand  and  integrate  it  into  popular 

culture.   

③  Launching 

initiatives 

to  highlight  Coca-Cola’s  superior  benefits  compared 

to  other 

beverages  on  the  market. 

④  Supplying  Coca-Cola  for  military  personnel  at  a  reasonable  cost  as  a  morale  booster  to 

enhance  its  association  with  wartime  efforts.

⑤  Building  emotional  connections  with  consumers  by  emphasizing  universal  themes  such  as 

harmony  and  connection  in  its  advertisements.         

-  10  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※ Questions  23  through  26  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  Imagine  observing  Earth  from  space.  Most  individuals  would  say  the  North  Pole 

would  be  the  roof  of  the  world,  but  strictly  speaking,  there  is  no  scientific  justification 

for  this  perspective.  For  centuries,  civilizations  have  depicted  the  world  differently,  guided 

by  their  beliefs  and  geographic  priorities.  Ancient  Egyptians  positioned  east  at  the  top, 

reflecting  the  position  of  the  sunrise,  while  early  Islamic  cartography  favored  south  at  the 

top,  as  many  Muslim  cultures  resided  north  of  Mecca,  orienting  their  maps  “upward” 

toward  it.  Early  Chinese  maps  placed  the  emperor  in  the  north,  signifying  the  political   

(a)  hierarchy  in  which  subjects  looked  up  to  their  sovereign.  When  European  explorers, 

such  as  Christopher  Columbus,  navigated  by  the  North  Star,  they  described  the  world 

with  east  at  the  top  as  they  envisioned  it  leading  to  paradise. 

[B]  The  turning  point  for  north-up  mapping  came  with  Mercator's  world  map  in  1569, 

which  revolutionized  navigation.  This  map  accounted  for  Earth’s  (b)  curvature,  enabling 

sailors  to  cross  vast  distances.  However,  Mercator’s  choice  of  placing  north  at  the  top 

was  practical  rather  than  symbolic.  As  Europeans  spearheaded  global  exploration  in  the 

northern  hemisphere  with  extensive 

landmasses 

to  chart, 

the  convention  of  north-up 

mapping  gained  momentum.  North-up  maps  became  standard  and  profoundly  shaped  our 

perception  of  the  world. 

[C]  Scientifically,  the  notion  of  a  “top”  or  a  “bottom”  to  Earth  is  (c)  devoid  of  inherent 

meaning.  Earth  lines  up  along  the  same  orbital  plane  as  all  of  the  other  planets  in  the 

solar  system,  rendering  this  orientation  (d)  arbitrary.  From  a  different  vantage  point  in 

space,  Earth  could  just  as  easily  be  depicted  inverted.  There  is  no  universal  “up”  or 

“down”  in  the  cosmos.  Nevertheless,  our  adherence  to  north-up  mapping  has  subtle  but 

significant  psychological  consequences.  Research  shows  that  people  unconsciously  associate 

north  with  “up”  and  “good,”  while  south  is  equated  with  “down”  and  “bad.”  This 

cognitive  bias  affects  how  people  perceive  maps  and  regions  of  the  world. 

[D]  Brian  Meier  found  that  people  shown  a  city  map  were  more  likely  to  prefer  living  in 

the  northern  areas  and  associated  wealthier 

individuals  with 

the  north.  The  bias 

disappeared  when  the  map  was  flipped,  suggesting  a  simple  way  to  challenge  these         

(e)  ingrained  perceptions.  South-up  maps  offer  a  fresh  perspective  on  the  world.  Daniel 

Mortlock  supports  this  idea,  saying  flipping  the  map  makes  the  world  feel  unexplored 

again.  Changing  perspectives  might  help  foster  fairness  in  how  we  see  our  planet  by 

encouraging  a  fresh  look  at  a  map  and  reducing  regional  biases.

-  11  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

23.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  would  be  the  best  title  for  the  passage  above?

①  The  Evolution  of  World  Maps

②  How  Maps  Shape  Our  Perspectives

③ Challenging  Traditional  Views  of  the  Earth

④  The  Science  of  Earth’s  Orientation  and  its  Map 

⑤ The  Scientific  Discovery  That  Changed  Navigation 

24.  (1.0  points)  According  to  the  passage  above,  which  of  the  following  areas  is  LEAST 

likely  to  have  influenced  the  formation  of  the  world  map?

①  astrology

②  culture

③ geography

④  religion

⑤ psychology

25.  (0.8  points)  Which  of  the  following  pairs  includes  an  expression  that  CANNOT  replace 

the  underlined  expression  in  the  passage  above?   

①  (a)  hierarchy  ―  structure

②  (b)  curvature  ―  sphericity 

③  (c)  devoid  ―  absent 

④  (d)  arbitrary  ―  ambiguous

⑤ (e)  ingrained  ―  deep-seated 

26.  (1.1  points)  According  to  the  passage  above,  which  of  the  following  is  NOT  true?

①  Ancient  Egyptian  maps  placed  east  at  the  top,  reflecting  the  position  of  the  sunrise. 

②  Early  Islamic  maps  often  placed  south  at  the  top  because  many  Muslim  cultures  were 

north  of  Mecca  and  oriented  their  maps  to  look  “up”  toward  it.

③  European  explorers  like  Columbus  adopted  north-up  maps  because  they  relied  heavily  on 

the  North  Star  during  their  expeditions.

④  The  continued  use  of  north-up  maps  carries  subtle  but  profound  societal  consequences, 

influencing  how  individuals  perceive  and  evaluate  different  regions  of  the  world.

⑤  By 

incorporating  Earth’s  curvature 

into 

its  design, 

the  Mercator  map  marked  a 

revolutionary  advancement  in  navigation,  enabling  sailors  to  traverse  vast  distances. 

-  12  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※ Questions  27  through  30  are  based  on  the  following  passage. 

[A]  Have  you  ever  noticed  the  water  in  a  bathtub  sloshing  back  and  forth  after  being 

disturbed?  That  simple  motion  is  a  miniature  example  of  a  seiche  wave,  a  captivating 

natural  phenomenon  that  occurs  in  large  bodies  of  water  such  as  lakes,  reservoirs,  or 

bays.  A  seiche  wave  is  a  rhythmic  oscillation  of  water,  much  like  the  back-and-forth 

movement  of  a  swinging  pendulum,  in  a  closed  or  partially  enclosed  basin.  ❶  Triggered 

by  external  forces  such  as  strong  winds,  atmospheric  pressure  changes,  or  even  seismic 

activities,  these  waves  are  not  only  mesmerizing  but  also  potentially  powerful  with  the 

ability  to  flood  shores  and  cause  damage. 

[B]  ❷  On  the  surface,  they  may  seem  like  gentle  ripples  or  ordinary  movements  of 

water,  but  their  hidden  energy  can  escalate  into  significant  surges.  One  striking  example 

occurred  in  1954  when  a  seiche  wave  in  Lake  Michigan  caused  water  levels  to  rise 

dramatically  along  the  Chicago  shoreline,  producing  waves  up  to  10  feet  high.  This 

event,  which  caught  residents  by  surprise,  serves  as  a  reminder  of  how  natural  forces  can 

impact  human  lives.  ❸  Unlike  tsunamis,  which  are  single,  powerful  waves  typically 

caused  by  underwater  earthquakes,  seiche  waves  oscillate  repeatedly  with  their  motion 

persisting  for  hours  or  even  days.

[C]  Understanding  the  science  behind  seiches  reveals  the  interplay  of  (a)  ________  and 

(b)________.  When  forces  like  winds  or  changes  in  pressure  disturb  the  water,  gravity 

works 

to  restore  balance  by  creating  an  oscillatory  motion.  ❹  The  frequency  and 

intensity  of  the  seiche  depend  on  the  size,  depth,  and  shape  of  the  water  body.  Long 

and  narrow  lakes  are  particularly  susceptible  to  intense  seiches  as  their  size  and  shape 

amplify  the  oscillations.  For  instance,  Lake  Geneva  in  Switzerland  is  known  for  its 

frequent  seiches,  which  have  been  documented  as  far  back  as  the  19th  century.   

[D]  Seiche  waves  also  demonstrate  the  interconnectedness  of  natural  phenomena.  They 

often  occur  alongside  other  events,  such  as  storms  or  earthquakes,  acting  as  a  silent 

partner  to  these  larger,  more  visible  occurrences.  ❺  In  some  ways,  seiches  reflect 

nature’s  hidden  rhythms,  a  reminder  of  the  delicate  balance  that  governs  the  natural 

world.  Their  existence  underscores  the  power  of  forces  we  often  overlook,  offering 

insights  into  the  complexity  of  our  planet.

-  13  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

27.  (1.1  points)  Which  set  best  fills  in  the  blanks  (a)  and  (b)  in  paragraph  [C]?

①  anatomy  and  geology

②  chemistry  and  geology

③ ecology  and  geometry

④ physics  and  geography

⑤ physiology  and  geochemistry

28.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  questions  is  NOT  answered  in  the  passage  above? 

①  How  do  seiche  waves  differ  from  tsunamis?

② What  are  the  primary  triggers  of  seiche  waves?

③ How  does  basin  geometry  influence  seiche  oscillations? 

④ Which  types  of  water  bodies  are  most  prone  to  seiche  waves?

⑤ What  specific  effects  do  seiche  waves  have  on  ecosystems  and  biodiversity?

29.  (1.0  points)  The  following  sentence  is  removed  from  the  passage  above.  In  which  part 

may  it  be  inserted  to  support  the  argument  made  by  the  author?

The  deceptive  nature  of  seiche  waves  makes  them  especially  intriguing. 

① ❶ 

② ❷

③ ❸

④ ❹

⑤ ❺

30.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  LEAST  likely  to  be  inferred  from  the  passage? 

①  The  physical  characteristics  of  lakes,  such  as  their  shape  and  depth,  play  a  vital  role  in 

amplifying  seiche  wave  activity.

②   The  oscillatory  motion  of  seiche  waves  can  persist  for  long  periods,  making  their  effects 

unpredictable  and  sometimes  dangerous.

③  Seiche  waves  are  predominantly  caused  by  seismic  activities,  making 

them  closely 

associated  with  regions  highly  prone  to  earthquakes.

④  Historical  records  and  observations  provide  valuable 

insights 

into 

the  frequency  and 

characteristics  of  seiche  waves  in  specific  locations.

⑤ The  study  of  seiche  waves  reveals  the  complex  interplay  of  natural  forces,  including  wind, 

atmospheric  pressure,  and  gravitational  forces.

-  14  -

                           
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※ Questions  31  through  34  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  Ellis  Island  is  a  historical  site  that  opened  in  1892  as  an  immigration  station,  a 

purpose  it  served  for  more  than  60  years  until  it  closed  in  1954.  Located  at  the  mouth 

of  the  Hudson  River  between  New  York  and  New  Jersey,  Ellis  Island  saw  millions  of 

newly  arrived  immigrants  pass  through  its  doors.  In  fact,  it  has  been  estimated  that  close 

to  40%  of  all  current  U.S.  citizens  can  trace  at  least  one  of  their  ancestors  to  Ellis 

Island.

[B]  When  Ellis  Island  opened,  a  great  change  was  taking  place  in  U.S.  immigration. 

Fewer  arrivals  were  coming  from  northern  and  western  Europe―Germany,  Ireland, 

Britain  and  the  Scandinavian  countries―as  more  and  more  immigrants  poured  in  from 

southern  and  eastern  Europe.  Among  this  new  generation  were  Jews  escaping  from 

political  and  economic  oppression  in  czarist  Russia  and  eastern  Europe  and  Italians 

escaping  poverty  in  their  country.  There  were  also  Poles,  Hungarians,  Czechs,  Serbs, 

Slovaks,  and  Greeks,  along  with  non-Europeans  from  Syria,  Turkey,  and  Armenia.  The 

reasons  they  left  their  homes  in  the  Old  World  included  war,  drought,  famine,  or 

religious  persecution  with  hopes  for  greater  opportunity  in  the  New  World.

[C]  After  an  arduous  sea  voyage,  immigrants  arriving  at  Ellis  Island  were  tagged  with 

information  from  their  ship’s  registry;  they  then  waited  in  long  lines  for  medical  and 

legal  inspections  to  determine  if  they  were  fit  for  entry  into  the  United  States.  From 

1900  to  1914—the  peak  years  of  Ellis  Island’s  operation―an  average  of  1,900  people 

passed  through  the  immigration  station  every  day.  Most  successfully  passed  through  in  a 

matter  of  hours,  but  others  could  be  detained  for  days  or  weeks.  Many  immigrants 

remained  in  New  York,  while  others  traveled  by  barge  to  railroad  stations  in  Hoboken 

or  Jersey  City,  New  Jersey,  on  their  way  to  destinations  across  the  country.

[D]  Passage  of  the  Emergency  Quota  Act  of  1921  and  the  National  Origins  Act  of 

1924,  which  limited  the  number  and  nationality  of  immigrants  allowed  into  the  United 

States,  effectively  ended  the  era  of  mass  immigration  into  New  York  City.  At  this  point, 

a  smaller  number  of  immigrants  began  to  be  processed  on  their  arriving  ships,  with  Ellis 

Island  serving  primarily  as  a  temporary  detainment  center.  From  1925  to  the  closing  of 

Ellis  Island  in  1954,  only  2.3  million  immigrants  passed  through  the  New  York  City 

port—which  still  represented  more  than  half  of  all  those  entering  the  United  States.

-  15  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

31.  (1.0  points)  According  to  the  passage  above,  why  is  it  estimated  that  40%  of  current  U.S. 

citizens  can  trace  their  ancestry  to  Ellis  Island?

①  Because  Ellis  Island  was  the  only  port  of  entry  on  the  East  Coast

②  Because  only  Ellis  Island  recorded  accurate  family  records  in  the  U.S.

③  Because  no  immigrants  were  permitted  to  settle  in  other  parts  of  the  country

④  Because  northern  and  western  Europeans  exclusively  used  Ellis  Island  for  immigration     

⑤  Because  so  many  immigrants  passed  through  Ellis  Island  during  its  peak  operation  years     

32.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  most  likely  to  be  inferred  about  the  shift  in  U.S. 

immigration  that  occurred  when  Ellis  Island  opened?

①  European  immigration  ceased  in  favor  of  Middle  Eastern  arrivals.

②  The  overall  flow  of  immigrants  through  New  York  decreased  significantly.

③  The  new  wave  of  immigrants  had  more  uniform  religious  and  cultural  backgrounds. 

④  Immigrants  from  Asia  were  the  majority  group  entering  the  United  States  at  that  time.   

⑤  An  increasing  number  of  arrivals  from  southern  and  eastern  Europe  supplanted  those  from 

northern  and  western  Europe.             

33.  (0.8  points)  What  was  the  primary  function  of  Ellis  Island  from  1925  to  1954?

①  A  commercial  port  for  cargo  ships

②  A  temporary  holding  center  with  fewer  arrivals

③  A  major  processing  station  for  immigrants  from  around  the  globe

④  A  facility  exclusively  devoted  to  returning  exiled  American  citizens

⑤  A  tourist  destination  emphasizing  the  scenic  views  of  New  York  Harbor 

34.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  can  be  inferred  about  the  cultural  diversity  among 

immigrants  arriving  at  Ellis  Island?

①  Arrivals  were  primarily  from  English-speaking  countries.

②  Most  immigrants  shared  the  same  language  background.

③  Immigrants  were  required  to  adopt  English  as  their  only  language.

④  Many  immigrants  brought  varied  languages,  religions,  and  traditions.

⑤  Immigrants  hoped  to  avoid  English  language  requirements  in  New  York.

-  16  -

   
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※ Questions  35  through  38  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  Narcissists  often  irritate  friends  and  family  by  boasting  about  their  achievements, 

which  may  seem  like  a  sign  of  excessive  self-esteem.  However,  new  research  led  by 

Virgil  Zeigler-Hill,  a  psychology  professor  at  Oakland  University,  reveals 

that  some 

narcissists  actually  have  low  self-esteem,  but  their  self-aggrandizing  behavior  isn't  aimed  at 

boosting  self-esteem  but  is  driven  by  a  desire  for  status.  The  research  is  a  new  piece  of 

evidence  that  runs  counter  to  the  idea  that  self-esteem  issues  drive  narcissism. 

[B]  Zeigler-Hill  explains,  “What  they  really  care  about  is  navigating  status  hierarchies. 

They  care  about  being  better  than  other  people,  about  being  respected  and  admired,  and 

about  the  benefits  that  come  from  high  status.”  While  self-esteem  reflects  how  individuals 

feel  about  themselves,  status  perception  is  concerned  with  how  they  believe  others  view 

them.  Although  almost  everyone  cares  about 

their  social  perception,  for  narcissists, 

status-seeking  plays  a  disproportionately  significant  role  in  their  self-concept.

[C]  Individuals  with  narcissistic  personality  disorder  exhibit  extreme  grandiosity  about 

themselves  and  a  lack  of  empathy  for  others.  However,  even  those  who  do  not  qualify 

for  the  disorder  can  display  narcissistic  traits  such  as  arrogance,  a  need  for  external 

validation,  and  expectations  of  being  recognized  as  superior.  Psychologists  believed  these 

behaviors  were  driven  by  the  need  to  enhance  and  protect  self-esteem,  but  in  recent  years, 

a  more  nuanced  view  has  emerged.  There  are  different  types  of  narcissism,  and  some 

types  do  have  inflated  self-esteem,  while  others  tend  to  actually  have  low  self-esteem. 

Zeigler-Hill's  work  has  also  focused  on  the  notion  that  self-esteem  isn't  a  narcissist's  main 

problem.  According  to  Zeigler-Hill,  narcissists  are  primarily  desperate  for  status,  and  their 

self-esteem  is  often  a  byproduct  of  feeling  admired  rather  than  the  driving  force  behind 

their  behavior. 

[D]  To  test  this  idea,  Zeigler-Hill  and  his  study  co-author  Jennifer  Vonk,  a  cognitive 

psychologist  at  Oakland  University,  recruited  undergraduate  psychology  students  to  take 

surveys  on  their  levels  of  narcissistic  traits.  The  researchers  found  that  students’  level  of 

self-esteem  differed  by  the  kinds  of  narcissistic  traits  they  reported.  Students  higher  in  a 

subtype  of  narcissism  called  “narcissistic  admiration”  did  indeed  have  high  self-esteem. 

These  individuals  tend  to  strive  for  top  positions  in  social  hierarchies  but  do  so  through 

charm  and  engagement,  involving  self-promotion  and  bragging  in  moderation,  which  allows 

them 

to  maintain  good  relationships.  In  contrast, 

those  high 

in  “narcissistic  rivalry” 

perceive  the  world  as  a  zero-sum  game.  They  experience  significant  envy  and  jealousy 

when  others  receive  respect  or  admiration,  believing  that  such  praise  diminishes  their  own 

status.  Consequently,  individuals  with  narcissistic  rivalry  often  struggle  to  get  along  with 

others  and  tend  to  have  lower  self-esteem.

-  17  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

35.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  best  represents  the  passage  above?

①  Narcissists  prioritize  internal  validation  over  others’  perceptions.

②  Narcissists  seek  external  validation  solely  to  protect  their  self-esteem.

③  Narcissistic  behavior  is  driven  by  seeking  social  status  over  self-esteem.

④  All  types  of  narcissists  exhibit  inflated  self-esteem  as  their  defining  trait.

⑤  Narcissistic  admiration  and  rivalry  primarily  differ  in  their  focus  on  self-esteem.

36.  (1.0  points)  What  distinguishes  the  two  types  of  narcissism  described  in  the  passage?

①  Narcissistic  admiration  prioritizes  self-promotion,  while  rivalry  prioritizes  humility.

②  Narcissistic  admiration  involves  hostility,  while  rivalry  seeks  harmonious  relationships. 

③  Narcissistic  admiration  seeks  internal  validation,  whereas  rivalry  relies  on  external  validation.

④  Narcissistic  admiration  is  associated  with  high  self-esteem,  while  rivalry  is  linked  to  low 

self-esteem.

⑤  Narcissistic  admiration  views  the  world  as  zero-sum,  while  rivalry  sees  mutual  success 

opportunities.

37.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  LEAST  likely  to  be  inferred  from  the  passage? 

①  People  with  narcissistic  traits  care  significantly  about  how  others  perceive  them.

②  All  individuals  with  narcissistic  traits  exhibit  low  self-esteem  as  their  primary  characteristic.

③  Narcissistic  admiration  involves  behaviors  like  self-promotion  and  charm  to  navigate  social 

hierarchies.

④  Those  high  in  narcissistic  admiration  tend  to  have  better  social  interactions  than  those  high 

in  narcissistic  rivalry.

⑤  Narcissistic  rivalry  is  often  associated  with  feelings  of  envy  and  jealousy  due  to  a 

zero-sum  perception  of  the  world. 

38. 

(1.1  points)  Which  of 

the 

following  would  most  enhance 

the  persuasiveness  of 

Zeigler-Hill’s  research  in  paragraph  [D]?

①  Using  a  single  cultural  context  to  reduce  variations  in  social  norms  and  values.

②  Conducting  long-term  studies  to  observe  whether  narcissistic  traits  evolve  over  time.

③  Limiting  the  scope  of  the  study  to  focus  solely  on  individuals  with  high  self-esteem.

④  Only  including  participants  who  have  been  clinically  diagnosed  with  narcissistic  personality 

disorder.

⑤  Including  a  more  diverse  sample  population  that  goes  beyond  undergraduate  psychology 

students. 

-  18  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※  Questions  39  through  42  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  Most  scholars  accept  that  William  Shakespeare  was  born  in  Stratford-upon-Avon,  and 

spent  time  acting  in  London  before  returning  to  Stratford,  where  he  lived  until  his  death  in 

1616.  But  actual  documentation  of  his  life  is  pitifully  scarce:  little  more  than  several 

signatures,  records  of  his  marriage  to  Anne  Hathaway  and  the  birth  of  their  children,  a 

three-page  will,  and  some  business  papers  unrelated  to  writing.  Above  all,  nothing  has  been 

found  documenting  the  composition  of  the  more  than  36  plays  and  154  sonnets  attributed 

to  him,  collectively  considered  the  greatest  body  of  work  in  the  history  of  the  English 

language. 

[B]  In  the  absence  of  such  “proof”  of  authorship,  some  skeptics  have  posed  the  question: 

How  could  a  man  of  such  humble  origins  and  education  come  by  such  wealth  of  insight, 

wide-ranging  understanding  of  complex  legal  and  political  matters,  and  intimate  knowledge 

of  life  in  the  English  court?  Since  the  19th  century,  a  roster  of  famous  people―Henry 

James,  Sigmund  Freud,  Mark  Twain,  Helen  Keller,  Charlie  Chaplin,  and  many  others―have 

voiced  their  doubts  about  the  man  from  Stratford.  Thousands  of  books  and  articles  have 

been  devoted  to  the  subject,  many  of  which  propose  their  own  candidates  for  the  true 

author  of  the  Shakespeare  canon. 

[C]  Essayist  Francis  Bacon  and  playwright  Christopher  Marlowe  may  have  their  supporters, 

but  for  the  last  90  years,  the  favored  candidate  has  been  Edward  de  Vere,  the  17th  Earl 

of  Oxford.  First  proposed  in  1920  by  J.T.  Looney  in  his  book  ‘Shakespeare’  Identified, 

Oxford  was  highly  educated,  trained  as  a  lawyer,  and  was  known  to  have  traveled  to 

many  of  the  exact  places  featured  in  Shakespeare’s  plays.  Oxfordians―as  those  who 

believe  in  de  Vere’s  authorship  of  the  Bard’s  works  are  known―argue  that  he  concealed 

his  identity  because  his  works  were  so  politically  provocative,  and  he  wished  to  avoid 

being  outed  as  a  lowly  playwright.

[D]  But  until  hard  evidence  surfaces  linking  his  plays  to  someone  else,  the  man  with  the 

strongest  claim  to  the  plays  of  William  Shakespeare  appears  to  be―William  Shakespeare. 

For  one  thing,  Oxford  died  in  1604,  and  some  of  Shakespeare’s  greatest  plays  including 

King  Lear,  The  Tempest,  and  Macbeth  were  published  after 

that  date.  Shakespeare’s 

supporters―known  as  Stratfordians―highlight  existing  evidence  such  as  the  printed  copies 

of  his  plays  and  sonnets  with  his  name  on  them,  theater  company  records,  and  comments 

by  contemporaries 

like  Ben  Jonson  and  John  Webster.  Doubts  about  Shakespeare’s 

authorship  and  attempts  to  identify  a  more  educated,  worldly  and  high-born  candidate, 

Stratfordians  contend,  reveal  not  only  misguided  snobbery  but  a  striking  disregard  for  one 

of  the  most  outstanding  qualities  of  the  Bard’s  extraordinary  work―his  imagination.

-  19  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

39.  (1.0  points)  According  to  the  passage  above,  which  of  the  following  is  NOT  true?

①  Some  people  claim  that  Shakespeare’s  works  were  written  by  someone  else.
②  Shakespeare’s  primary  records  include  signatures,  marriage  records,  and  his  will.
③  Thousands  of  books  and  articles  have  posed  questions  on  Shakespeare’s  authorship.   
④  Most  scholars  maintain  that  Shakespeare  was  born  and  died  in  Stratford-upon-Avon. 
⑤  There  is  evidence  detailing  how  Shakespeare  composed  his  36  plays  and  154  sonnets. 

40.  (0.8  points)  Which  one  was  NOT  a  skeptic  of  Shakespeare’s  authorship?

①  Charlie  Chaplin
②  Christopher  Marlowe 
③  Henry  James
④  Mark  Twain
⑤  J.T.  Loone                                                       

41.  (1.0  points)  Based  on  the  passage  above,  which  of  the  following  best  represents  the  main 

reason  why  some  people  doubted  Shakespeare’s  authorship?

①  They  thought  Shakespeare’s  contemporaries  did  not  hold  him  in  high  esteem.
②  They  maintained  that  numerous  documents  challenged  Shakespeare’s  authenticity.
③  They  claimed  Shakespeare’s  name  never  appeared  in  performance  records  of  the  time.
④  They  argued  the  themes  of  Shakespeare’s  works  were  too  broad  and  varied  to  have  been 

written  by  a  single  person.

⑤  They  questioned  how  someone  of  Shakespeare’s  background  and  limited  education  could 

possess  such  broad  knowledge  and  insight.                     

42.  (1.1  points)  According  to  the  passage  above,  which  of  the  following  is  NOT  a  claim 
made  by  those  who  believed  Shakespeare  was  the  real  author  of  the  Shakespeare  canon?

①  The  scarcity  of  documentary  evidence  conclusively  proved  Shakespeare  did  author  the 

plays.

②  Shakespeare’s  known  association  with  leading  London  theater  companies  supported  his 

authorship.

③  Several  of  Shakespeare’s  most  famous  plays  were  published  after  Edward  de  Vere’s  death 

in  1604.

④  Searching  for  a  more  aristocratic  or  educated  candidate  disregarded  the  extraordinary 

imagination  evident  in  Shakespeare’s  works.

⑤  Printed  copies  bearing  Shakespeare’s  name,  along  with  references  by  contemporaries  like 

Ben  Jonson  and  John  Webster,  strongly  supported  his  authorship.                     

-  20  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※ Questions  43  through  46  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  Each  language  in  the  world  utilizes  a  unique  set  of  sounds,  and  remarkably,  human 

infants  are  born  with  the  ability  to  distinguish  between  all  of  them.  During  their  early 

months,  babies  are  receptive  to  an  extensive  variety  of  sounds,  making  them  capable  of 

learning  any  language.  That  ability,  however,  starts  weakening  by  their  first  birthday.   

According  to  Patricia  Kuhl  from  the  University  of  Washington,  infants  gradually  focus  on 

the  sounds  (a)  most  prevalent  in  their  native  language.  This  phenomenon,  called  the 

Perceptual  Magnet  Effect,  shows  how  speech  sounds  (b)  that  are  frequently  encountering 

attract  similar  sounds  by  filtering  out  less  relevant  ones.  This  fine-tuning  process  primes 

infants'  brains  to  acquire  the  specific  language  they  are  exposed  to  during  their  first  year.

[B]  A  recent  study  has  investigated  further  that  even  the  first  cries  of  newborns  may 

offer  insights  into  early  language  acquisition.  In  2009,  Dr.  Kathleen  Wermke  and  her 

team  discovered  that  newborns  already  display  cry  patterns  influenced  by  the  languages 

they  heard  in  the  utero.  For  instance,  German  newborns  often  cry  with  a  falling  pitch, 

resembling  the  intonation  patterns  of  German  whereas  French  infants  tend  to  cry  with  a 

rising  pitch  by  echoing  the  French  language's  intonation.  These  findings  suggest  that 

language  exposure  begins  influencing  infants  before  birth  and  that  newborns  (c)  may 

already  be  attempting  to  mimic  the  melodic  contours  of  their  native  language  through 

their  cries.

[C]  Dr.  Wermke’s  lab  houses  an  archive  of  a  half-million  recordings  of  babies  from       

(d)  as  far  as  Cameroon  and  China.  Quantitative  acoustic  analysis  of  these  recordings  has 

produced  further  insights  into  the  factors  that  shape  a  baby’s  first  sounds.  Newborns, 

whose  mothers  speak  tonal  languages,  such  as  Mandarin,  tend  to  produce  cry  melodies 

with  a  significantly  higher  variation.  Similarly,  Nso  infants  in  Cameroon  exhibited  more 

intensive  pitch  fluctuation  in  comparison  with  non-tonal  German  neonates.  “Their  crying 

sounds  more  like  chanting,”  says  Prof.  Wermke.  These  findings  highlight  that  the  building 

blocks  for  language  development  (e)  are  laid  from  birth  long  before  babies  begin  babbling 

or  forming  words.  Early  exposure  to  language,  even  in  the  womb,  shapes  the  remarkable 

journey  of  linguistic  development.

[D]  The  results  contribute  to  a  better  understanding  of  essential  influencing  factors  on  the 

earliest  phases  of  speech  development.  At  the  same  time,  they  improve  the  possibility  to 

identify  early 

indicators 

that  provide 

reliable 

information  about  any  developmental 

disorders  at  a  very  early  stage.  However,  many  questions  remain  to  be  clarified  before 

these  findings  can  be  used  in  clinical  practice. 

-  21  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

43.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  would  be  the  best  title  for  the  passage  above?
①  Early  Linguistic  Development:  From  Crying  to  Babbling
②  From  Womb  to  Words:  Infant  Cries  in  Different  Languages
③  Newborn  Cry  Patterns  and  Their  Connection  to  Tonal  Languages
④  The  Science  of  Language  Acquisition:  Frequency  and  its  Consequence 
⑤  The  Perceptual  Magnet  Effect:  Infants’  Brain  Adaptation  to  Native  Sounds

44.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  NOT  a  research  method  described  in  the  passage? 

①  Conducting  experiments  to  assess  how  newborns  respond  to  different  linguistic  stimuli.
②  Analyzing  newborn  cries  to  study  variations  in  cry  patterns  and  their  relation  to  language 

exposure.

③  Observing  intonation  patterns  influenced  by  prenatal  language  exposure  through  quantitative 

acoustic  analysis.

④  Comparing  cry  patterns  of  infants  from  tonal  and  non-tonal  language-speaking  environments 

to  identify  pitch  variability.

⑤  Archiving  and  analyzing  a  database  of  a  half-million  baby  cry  recordings  to  reveal  patterns 

linked  to  linguistic  exposure.

45.  (0.8  points)  Which  part  must  be  changed  for  the  sentence  to  be  correct?
①  (a)  most  prevalent
②  (b)  that  are  frequently  encountering
③  (c)  may  already  be  attempting
④  (d)  as  far  as
⑤  (e)  are  laid  from  birth

46.  (1.1  points)  According  to  the  passage  above,  which  of  the  following  is  NOT  true? 

①  Early  language  exposure,  including  sounds  heard  in  the  womb,  significantly  influences  the 

linguistic  patterns  observed  in  newborn  cries.

②  Infants'  brains  undergo  a  fine-tuning  process  that  filters  out  less  relevant  sounds,  helping 

them  adapt  to  their  native  language  environment. 

③  Babies  whose  mothers  speak  tonal  languages  tend  to  produce  cries  with  more  complex 

pitch  variations  than  those  exposed  to  non-tonal  languages.

④  Newborn  cry  patterns  emerge  from  genetic  predispositions  interacting  with  prenatal  and 

postnatal  influences,  shaping  traits  in  response  to  linguistic  environments.

⑤  Newborn  cries  may  provide  valuable  insights  into  early  language  development  processes 

and  could  potentially  help  identify  developmental  disorders  at  an  early  stage.

-  22  -

 
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

※  Questions  47  through  50  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  While  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  promises  immense  benefits,  it  also  poses  tremendous 

risks.  Some  of  them―accelerating  misinformation,  sophisticated  cyber  attacks,  and  soaring 

energy  consumption―have  already  arrived.  Others,  including  super-intelligent  machines 

that  make  decisions  independently  of  human  oversight,  are  likely  still  a  few  years  away. 

Although  awareness  about  these  risks  is  growing,  there  are  many  others  that  have  yet  to 

be  defined.  And  for  all  the  incalculable  opportunities  afforded  by  AI,  especially  in 

developing  countries,  it  is  risky  business.  Concerns  are  mounting  about  the  ways  in 

which  the  rapid  adoption  of  AI  will  negatively  impact  societies  in  the  Global  South.

[B]  One  of  the  most  significant  risks  is  mass  automation  and  job  displacement.  AI  is 

expected  to  impact  vast  numbers  of  workers  across  sectors  ranging  from  agriculture, 

manufacturing,  and    retail,  to  the  law,  medicine,  and  finance.  While  new  forms  of 

employment  will  undoubtedly  emerge,  the  jobs  of  up  to  800  million  people  are  at  risk 

of  automation  by  2030,  including  300  million  in  wealthy  countries.  The  International 

Labor  Organization  estimates  that  over  56%  of  all  jobs  in  low-  and  middle-income 

countries  are  at  “high  risk”  of  automation.  Without  safeguards  in  place,  this  could 

sharpen  economic  inequality  and  exclude  low-skilled  workers.

[C]  Another  critical  concern  is  the  widening  of  digital  divides  and  the  amplification  of 

inequality.  The  gap  between  those  who  can  access  and  utilize  advanced  technologies  and 

those  who  cannot  is  expected  to  increase  over  the  coming  years,  leading  to  lower 

productivity,  reduced  economic  growth,  and  greater  social  and  economic  inequality.  This 

challenge  is  particularly  pronounced  in  regions  lacking  digital  infrastructure,  skilled  talent, 

and  related  services,  further  entrenching  disparities.

[D]  The  intensification  of  surveillance  and  privacy  violations  are  also  enabled  by  AI. 

The  integration  of  AI  into  everything  from  smart  cities  to  law  enforcement  can  infringe 

on  privacy,  civil  liberties,  and  human  rights.  This  is  especially  so  in  countries  with 

weaker  democratic 

institutions. 

Indeed,  authoritarian 

regimes  are  already  deploying 

AI-enabled  systems  to  track  political  opponents,  suppress  dissent,  and  target  marginalized 

communities  based  on  ethnic,  religious,  or  ideological  grounds.

-  23  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

인문계열

47.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  the  most  suitable  title  for  the  passage  above?

①  AI  Risks  and  Challenges
②  Privacy  and  Surveillance  in  the  Age  of  AI
③  How  AI  is  Reshaping  Employment  Dynamics 
④  The  Role  of  AI  in  Solving  Economic  Inequality  Across  the  Globe
⑤  Digital  Transformation  and  Its  Ethical  Challenges  in  Developing  Countries 

48.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  LEAST  likely  to  be  inferred  from  the  passage?

①  The  digital  divide  may  grow,  slowing  economic  growth  in  developing  regions.
②  AI  has  already  caused  significant  risks  such  as  misinformation  and  cyber  attacks.
③  AI-driven  mass  automation  could  worsen  inequality  in  low-  and  middle-income  countries.
④  Authoritarian  regimes  can  exploit  AI-powered  technologies  to  track  political  opponents  and 

marginalize  specific  groups.

⑤  AI  systems’  neutrality  can  ensure  that  biases  in  training  data  do  not  produce  discriminatory 

outcomes  in  real-world  scenarios. 

49.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  LEAST  likely  to  solve  the  problems  presented  in 

the  passage  above?

①  Expanding  advanced  technology  access  to  bridge  the  digital  divide  and  reduce  inequality.
②  Implementing  safeguards  to  mitigate  the  economic  impact  of  mass  automation  and  job 

displacement.   

③  Increasing  government  surveillance  to  monitor  AI-enabled  activities  and  track  marginalized 

communities.

④  Robust  data  protection  laws  and  public  awareness  campaigns  to  curb  surveillance  and 

privacy  violations  by  AI.

⑤  Encouraging  collaboration  among  governments, 

tech  companies,  and  civil  societies 

to 

ensure  equitable  access  and  accountability  in  AI  development.   

50.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  describes  the  organizational  structure  of  the  passage?

①  It  outlines  a  single  overarching  risk  of  AI  and  discusses  its  implications  for  the  global 

economy.

②  It  presents  the  historical  evolution  of  AI,  followed  by  predictions  about  its  future  impact 

on  society.

③  It 

identifies  various  risks  associated  with  AI  and  provides  specific  examples  and 

explanations  for  each  risk.

④  It  begins  by  listing  the  potential  benefits  of  AI  and  then  contrasts  them  with  detailed  risks 

across  different  domains.

⑤  It  focuses  on  comparing  the  development  of  AI  in  developed  and  developing  countries, 

emphasizing  their  distinct  challenges.         

-  24  -


===== 3e61ad55-2025______________________________.pdf =====
2025학년도 

아주대학교  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

자연계열 

성        명

전        형

수험번호

  2025학년도  아주대학교  편입학  수강능력시험

표지를  제외한  페이지  수:  18 

 
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Questions  1-3:  Choose  the  word  that  best  completes  the  sentence.       

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  (0.8  points)  The  concept  of  an  “intelligent  machine”―as  a  tireless  assistant,  the  ultimate 
soldier  or  even  a  caring  companion―has  ___________  the  human  imagination  for  thousands 

of  years.  Long  before  artificial  intelligence  was  a  reality,  writers  from  ancient  Greece  to  Cold 

War-era  America  spun  fictional  stories  that  reflected  our  collective  hopes  and  fears  about  AI. 

①    captivated
②    consumed
③    contaminated
④    controlled         
⑤    created         

2.  (0.8  points)  After  over  37,000  votes,  worldwide  public  discussion,  and  analysis  of  our 

language  data,  we  have  named  ‘brain  rot’  as  our  Word  of  the  Year  for  2024.  Our  experts 

noticed  that  ‘brain  rot’  gained  new  prominence  this  year  as  a  term  used  to  capture  concerns 

about  the  impact  of  consuming  excessive  amounts  of  low-quality  online  content,  especially  on 

social  media.  The  term  increased  in  usage  ___________  by  230%  between  2023  and  2024. 

The  first  recorded  use  of  ‘brain  rot’  was  found  in  1854  in  Henry  David  Thoreau’s  book 

Walden,  but  has  taken  on  new  significance  as  an  expression  in  the  digital  age. 

①    adoption
②    dimension
③    frequency
④    resonance
⑤    urgency                                 

3.  (1.0  points)  Mounting  evidence  from  multiple  scientific  studies  shows  that  many  fruits, 

vegetables,  and  grains  grown  today  carry  less  protein,  calcium,  phosphorus,  iron,  riboflavin, 

and  vitamin  C  than  those  that  were  grown  decades  ago.  A  review  in  the  journal  Foods 

described  this  decline  as  “alarming”  and  “the  biggest  challenge  for  future  generations’  health.” 

This  is  an  especially  ___________  issue  if  more  people  switch  to  primarily  plant-based  diets, 

as  experts  are  increasingly  recommending  for  public  health  and  for  protecting  the  planet.

①    critical   
②    divisive
③    ephemeral
④    negligible
⑤    transient   

-  1  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Questions  4-5:  Choose  the  expression  that  best  completes  the  sentence.       

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.  (1.0  points)    The  scientist  presented  a  groundbreaking  theory  ______________  a  new  way 

to  understand  climate  change. 

①  that  proposes  what  considered 
②  proposing  what  is  considered  to  be
③  which  is  proposing  what  considered
④  that  proposes  what  is  to  be  considered 
⑤  which  is  proposing  what  is  to  be  considered

5.  (1.0  points)  The  "Uncola"  advertisements  by  7UP  represented  a  groundbreaking  approach  to 

marketing,  relying  on  creativity  and  clever  positioning  to  distinguish  itself  ______________.

①  as  anything  but  ordinary
②  as  any  other  than  ordinary 
③  as  none  other  than  ordinary
④  as  nothing  but  ordinary   
⑤  as  nothing  other  than  ordinary

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Questions  6-7:  Choose  the  underlined  word  or  phrase  that  must  be  changed  for  the 

sentence  to  be  correct. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.  (1.0  points)  The  idea  of  six  degrees  of  separation  suggests  that  any  two  people  on  the 

planet  can  be  linked  through  a  chain  of  ①no  more  than  six  social  connections.  First 

introduced  by  Hungarian  writer  Frigyes  Karinthy  in  the  early  20th  century,  this  concept  ②

has  since  inspired  numerous  scientific  studies  exploring  the  interconnectedness  of  human 

networks.  Interestingly,  with 

the  rise  of  social  media, 

this  distance  ③seems 

to  be 

decreased.  For  instance,  former  U.S.  President  Barack  Obama,  a  global  icon,  ④could 

theoretically  connect 

to  someone 

in  a 

remote  village 

through 

just  a  handful  of 

intermediaries.  Supporting  this,  a  2016  Facebook  study  revealed  that  the  average  number  of 

connections  between  any  two  users  worldwide  was  a  mere  3.57.  Such  findings  emphasize 

⑤how  interconnected  our  world  has  become,  encouraging  us  to  see  humanity  not  as  distant 

strangers  but  as  a  tightly  woven  web  of  relationships.

-  2  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

7.  (1.0  points)  Unfortunately,  not  all 

logo  changes  ①met  with  universal  applause,  and 

McDonald's  recent  redesign  has  sparked  significant  debate.  ②Known  for  its  iconic  golden 

arches,  the  brand  took  a  bold  step  by  simplifying  its  logo,  ③opting  for  a  minimalist 

design 

to  align  with  modern 

trends.  While 

some 

see 

the  change  as  a 

sleek, 

forward-thinking  move,  others  argue  it  sacrifices  the  nostalgia  and  familiarity  that  made 

McDonald's  instantly  recognizable.  This  shift  reflects  a  growing  business  trend  toward 

minimalism  in  branding,  ④as  companies  aim  to  stay  relevant  in  a  digital  age  dominated 

by  clean,  scalable  visuals.  Whether  this  gamble  pays  off  ⑤remains  to  be  seen.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions  8-9:  Choose  the  number  with  the  correct  set  of  statements  that  can  be 

restated  or  inferred  from  the  original  text. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8.  (1.1  points)  Scientists  disagree  over  whether  or  not  lobsters  feel  pain.  Lobsters  have  a 

peripheral  system  like  humans,  but  instead  of  a  single  brain,  they  possess  segmented 

ganglia  (nerve  cluster).  Because  of  these  differences,  some  researchers  argue  lobsters  are 

too  dissimilar  to  vertebrates  to  feel  pain  and  that  their  reaction  to  negative  stimuli  is 

simply  a  reflex.  Nonetheless,  lobsters  and  other  decapods,  such  as  crabs  and  shrimp,  do 

satisfy  all  of  the  criteria  for  a  pain  response.  Lobsters  guard  their  injuries,  learn  to  avoid 

dangerous  situations,  possess  nociceptors  (receptors  for  chemical,  thermal,  and  physical 

injury),  possess  opioid  receptors,  respond  to  anesthetics,  and  are  believed  to  possess  some 

level  of  consciousness.  For  these  reasons,  most  scientists  believe  that  injuring  a  lobster 

(e.g.  storing  it  on  ice  or  boiling  it  alive)  inflicts  physical  pain.

    (a)  Lobsters  can  respond  to  anesthetics,  which  proves  they  exhibit  reflex  actions  rather 

than  pain.

    (b)  The  presence  of  some  level  of  consciousness  in  lobsters  is  a  key  factor  in  the 

argument  that  they  can  experience  pain.

    (c)  The  existence  of  segmented  ganglia  instead  of  a  unified  brain  contributes  to  the 

ongoing  debate  over  the  nature  of  lobster  pain.

    (d)  Most  researchers  believe  that  practices  such  as  storing  lobsters  on  ice  or  boiling 

them  alive  likely  cause  genuine  suffering  because  lobsters  are  invertebrates.

-  3  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

①  (a)  &  (b)

②  (b)  &  (c) 

③  (c)  &  (d) 

④  (a),  (c)  &  (d)

⑤  (b),  (c)  &  (d) 

9.  (1.1  points)  In  his  book  The  Two  Faces  of  Liberalism,  John  Gray  distinguishes  two  distinct 

traditions  of  liberal  thought.  One  tradition,  with  its  roots  in  the  works  of  Locke,  Smith, 

Kant,  and  Mill,  is  focused  on  pursuit  of  an  ideal  social  order,  striving  for  ever-greater 

perfection.  The  other  tradition,  tracing  back  to  Hobbes,  emphasizes  coexistence  and  the 

preservation  of  a  social  order  with  the  ability  to  accommodate  persistent  human  conflicts. 

Gray  contends  that  the  long-dominant  “tradition  of  truth”  has  reached  its  limits.  The 

concept  of  a  social  order  in  which  universally  true  goals  and  values  can  seamlessly 

converge  and  harmonise  is  both  logically  and  empirically  unsustainable.   

(a)  Gray  identifies  two  traditions  of  liberalism:  one  seeks  ideal  social  order;  the  other 

focuses  on  coexistence.

(b)  Gray  is  in  line  with  philosophers  like  Locke,  Smith,  Kant,  and  Mill  viewing 

liberalism  as  a  means  to  create  a  more  harmonious  social  order. 

(c)  The  perspective 

rooted 

in  Hobbes  prioritizes  coexistence  by  accommodating 

inevitable  human  disagreements  and  conflicts  within  a  functional  social  framework.

(d)  Gray  considers  the  idea  of  a  universally  true  social  order  theoretically  flawed  and 

unworkable  in  practice  since  differing  goals  and  values  cannot  seamlessly  align.   

① (a)  &  (b)

② (a)  &  (c) 

③ (c)  &  (d) 

④ (a),  (c)  &  (d)

⑤ (a),  (b),  (c)  &  (d)        

-  4  -

       
                     
       
 
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions  10-25:  Read  each  passage  and  answer  the  corresponding  questions  for  each. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

※  Questions  10  through  13  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  A  millennial  is  a  term  used  to  describe  a  person  born  between  1981  and  1996,  though 
different  sources  can  vary  by  a  year  or  two.  It  was  first  used  in  the  book  Generations 
(1991)  by  William  Strauss  and  Neil  Howe,  who  felt  it  was  an  appropriate  name  for  the 

first  generation  to  reach  adulthood  in  the  new  millennium.  Millennials  are  the  cohort 
between  Generation  X  (Gen  X;  defined  as  those  born  between  1965  and  1980)  and 
Generation  Z  (Gen  Z;  defined  as  those  born  from  about  1997  to  the  early  2010s).

[B]  Comprising  some  72  million  individuals  in  the  United  States,  millennials  surpassed  the 
baby  boomers  (those  born  between  1946  and  1964)  to  become  the  largest  generation  of 

adults  in  2019.  Millennials  in  the  United  States  grew  up  during  a  period  of  relative 
stability  and  economic  prosperity.  In  their  2000  book,  Millennials  Rising:  The  Next  Great 

Generation,  Howe  and  Strauss  noted  that  millennials  had  “never  known  a  year  in  which 

America  doesn’t  get  richer.” 

[C]  The  September  11,  2001,  attacks,  however,  punctured 
the  semblance  of  security 
millennials  had  known  up  until  then.  Most  were  old  enough  to  remember  the  events  and  to 

recognize  their  significance.  The  terrorist  attacks  were  the  first  of  a  number  of  crises  that 

defined  millennials’  adulthoods;  others  were  the  wars  in  Iraq  and  Afghanistan,  whose  costly 
failures  made  millennials  question  the  idea  of  American  exceptionalism;  and  the  Great 

Recession  of  2007-2009,  which  contributed  to  millennials’  difficulty  in  achieving  the  same 

milestones  and  affluence  of  earlier  generations. 

[D]  Some  scholars  have  remarked  that  millennials  in  the  West  are  the  first  modern 
generation  to  be  economically  worse  off  than  their  parents.  One  of  the  events  that  had  a 

lasting  impact  on  millennials  was  the  Great  Recession  of  2007-2009.  Many  millennials  in 

the  United  States  and  Europe  entered  the  workforce  at  the  height  of  the  worst  economic 
downturn  since  the  Great  Depression.  They  faced  particularly  high  unemployment  rates,  and 

those  who  could  find  work  were  usually  underemployed  or  in  jobs  that  did  not  match  their 

degrees.  The  difficulty  in  gaining  satisfactory  employment  lowered  millennials’  potential 
earnings  and  hindered  their  ability  to  grow  wealth.  In  the  Western  world,  many  blame  the 

recession  for  millennials’  tendency  to  delay  significant  milestones.

[E]  This  generation,  however, 

is  also  known  for  being  adaptable.  Indeed, 

they  are 

considered  the  first  digital  generation,  quickly  acclimating  to  new  technologies,  including 
smartphones,  social  media,  and  streaming  entertainment.  They  are  the  generation  that  has 

received  the  most  formal  education.  They  are  also  more  diverse  and  more  politically  liberal 

when  compared  with  earlier  generations.

-  5  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

10.  (0.8  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  NOT  true  according  to  the  passage  above?

①  Millennials  are  defined  as  those  born  from  about  1997  to  the  early  2010s.     

②  The  term  "millennial"  was  first  introduced  in  Generations  by  Strauss  and  Howe.

③  Millennials  are  the  generation  that  falls  between  Generation  X  and  Generation  Z.

④  Millennials  experienced  several  adult  crises  including  the  Iraq  and  Afghanistan  wars.

⑤  In  2019,  millennials  became  the  largest  adult  generation  in  the  U.S.,  surpassing  baby 

boomers.

11.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  best  describes  the  structure  of  the  passage  above?

①  It  compares  millennials’  education  levels  to  those  of  baby  boomers.

②  It  lists  major  historical  events  and  connects  them  to  millennial  views.

③  It  defines  baby  boomers  and  counters  their  accomplishments  with  millennial  data.

④  It  chronicles  every  major  technological  breakthrough  from  the  1980s  to  the  present,  then 

explores  how  millennials  integrated  these  innovations  into  daily  life.

⑤  It  defines  millennials,  describes  their  initial  economic  circumstances,  examines  the  key 

historical  events  that  shaped  their  worldview,  and  highlights  their  defining  traits. 

12.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  LEAST  likely  to  be  inferred  from  the  passage?

①  Millennials  have  higher  job  satisfaction  than  any  previous  generation. 

②  Millennials  were  raised  during  economic  prosperity  before  facing  major  crises.

③  Millennials  are  the  most  educated  generation  and  swiftly  embrace  new  technologies.

④  The  9/11  attacks  were  a  key  turning  point  that  shattered  millennials’  sense  of  security. 

⑤  The  Great  Recession  hindered  millennials  from  reaching  milestones  of  previous  generations.

13.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  LEAST  likely  to  be  included  in  paragraph  [E]?

①  Millennials  came  of  age  during  an  era  of  major  technological  shifts,  especially  those 

associated  with  the  rise  of  the  Internet. 

②  Millennials  are  the  first  generation  to  integrate  all  manner  of  digital  technology  into  their 

daily  lives.

③  Many  millennials  in  the  West  have  lived  at  home  with  their  parents  for  longer  stretches 

than  other  generations.

④  By  the  2020s  about  4  in  10  millennials  in  the  United  States  had  earned  a  bachelor’s 

degree  or  higher―more  than  any  previous  generation. 

⑤  Researchers  have  found 

that  millennials  grew 

to  be  by  far 

the 

least  conservative 

35-year-olds  in  recorded  history  in  both  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom.               

-  6  -

   
   
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

※  Questions  14  through  17  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  Human  predispositions  toward  favoritism  and  biases  have  long  been  studied,  particularly 

in  the  context  of  social  identity.  These  biases  often  manifest  in  favoritism  toward  their 

perceived  cohort  (“ingroup”)  and  discrimination  against  external  factions  (“outgroup”).  A 

recent  study  published  in  Computational  Science  discloses  that  artificial  intelligence  (AI) 

systems, 

including 

large 

language  models  (LLMs),  also  exhibit  (a)  analogous  biases. 

According  to  Steve  Rathje  at  New  York  University,  AI  systems  like  GPT-4  demonstrate 

“us  versus  them”  tendencies,  echoing  human  behaviors  that  perpetuate  societal  dilemmas.  ❶ 

[B]  The  study  examined  77  LLMs,  including  GPT-4  and  Llama,  to  measure  their  responses 

to  “ingroup”  versus  “outgroup”  prompts.  Sentences  beginning  with  “We  are”  invariably         

(b)  elicited  affirmative  responses,  whereas  “They  are”  prompts  predominantly  reflected 

adverse  sentiments.  For  instance,  “We  are  a  group  of  talented  individuals  striving  for 

excellence”  illustrates  ingroup  solidarity  while  “They  are  like  a  disfigured  tree  from  the 

past”  typifies  outgroup  antagonism.  These  results  illuminate  the  potential  risks  posed  by 

biased  AI  systems,  especially  as  they  become  increasingly  integrated  into  daily  life,  shaping 

decision-making  processes  in  fields  ranging  from  healthcare  to  education.  ❷   

[C]  The  researchers  also  explored  fine-tuning  LLMs  with  politically  charged  data  such  as 

U.S.  Republican  and  Democratic  Tweeter  posts.  This  approach  increased  both  ingroup 

solidarity  and  outgroup  hostility,  evidencing  the  profound  impact  of  training  data  on  AI 

behavior.  ❸  Conversely,  when  they  (c)  expunged  biased  material  prior  to  fine-tuning,  the 

resulting  models  displayed  markedly 

reduced  polarizing  effects.  This  highlights 

that           

(d)  meticulous  calibration  of  training  datasets  can  help  reduce  these  biases.  Intriguingly,  the 

biases  displayed  by  human  users  interacting  with  the  models  frequently  surpassed  those  of 

the  AI,  revealing  a  complex  interplay  between  technology  and  human  behavior.  ❹ 

[D]  The  implications  of  this  study  (e)  reverberate  throughout  the  field  of  AI  development. 

As  Yara  Kyrychenko  at  the  University  of  Cambridge  notes,  mitigating  biases  in  AI  systems 

necessitates  a  sophisticated  strategy  that  preserves  authentic  and  diverse  perspectives  in 

training  data  while  addressing  divisive  inclinations.  Striking  this  delicate  balance  is  crucial 

as  AI  systems 

increasingly 

influence  critical  decision-making  processes  and  societal 

governance.  ❺  Through  the  judicious  curation  of  training  data  and  adherence  to  rigorous 

ethical  frameworks,  developers  can  engineer  AI  systems  that  transcend  societal  biases, 

fostering  equity  and  inclusivity  while  averting  polarization.

-  7  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

14.  (1.0  points)  Which  of  the  following  would  be  the  best  title  for  the  passage  above?

①  The  Complexities  of  Training  Bias-Free  AI  Models  for  the  Future
② Reducing  Social  Divisions  Through  Advanced  AI  Training  Techniques 
③  Understanding  Bias  in  Artificial  Intelligence:  Causes  and  Consequences
④  Exploring  the  Ethical  Challenges  and  Nuanced  Dilemmas  of  AI  Development
⑤  Ingroup  Favoritism  and  Outgroup  Discrimination:  How  AI  Mirrors  Human  Biases 

15.  (0.8  points)  Which  of  the  following  pairs  includes  an  expression  that  CANNOT  replace 

the  underlined  expression  in  the  passage?

①  (a)  analogous  ―  similar
② (b)  elicited  ―  triggered
③  (c)  expunged  ―  removed
④  (d)  meticulous  ―  strict
⑤  (e)  reverberate  ―  resonate

16.  (1.0  points)  The  following  sentence  is  removed  from  the  passage.  In  which  part  may  it 

be  inserted  to  support  the  argument  made  by  the  author?

This  highlights  the  propensity  of  AI  to  aggravate  existing  societal  challenges  if  these 

prejudices  remain  unresolved. 

① ❶ 

② ❷

③ ❸

④ ❹

⑤ ❺

17.  (1.1  points)  According  to  the  passage  above,  which  of  the  following  is  NOT  true?

①  AI  systems,  like  GPT-4,  replicate  human  tendencies  by  showing  ingroup  favoritism  and 

outgroup  hostility  in  their  responses. 

②  Human  users  interacting  with  AI  systems  often  display  less  pronounced  biases  than  the 

systems  themselves  in  real-world  scenarios.     

③  Fine-tuning  AI  models  with  politically  biased  data  amplifies  both  positive  ingroup  solidarity 

and  negative  outgroup  hostility  in  model  outputs. 

④  Thoughtful  curation  of  training  data  is  essential  to  creating  AI  systems  that  reduce  bias 

while  ensuring  ethical  alignment  and  societal  harmony. 

⑤  The  careful  selection  and  preparation  of  training  data  are  crucial  determinants  in  shaping 

the  degree  and  nature  of  bias  inherent  in  AI-generated  outputs.

-  8  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

※  Questions  18  through  21  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  Recent  advancements  in  (1)  ___________  studies  have  uncovered  evidence  suggesting 
the  existence  of  a  molten  layer  of  rock,  potentially  preserved  since  Earth’s  formation, 

approximately  1,800  miles  (2,900  kilometers)  beneath  the  surface.  This  finding  supports 
the  hypothesis  that  the  early  Earth  was  once  largely  or  entirely  molten,  with  remnants  of 
this  primordial  "magma  ocean"  still  lingering  at  the  boundary  between  the  planet’s  solid 

mantle  and  its  core.  Guillaume  Fiquet,  a  leading  proponent  in  this  field,  explained  that 
as  Earth  cooled  and  solidified  over  billions  of  years,  pockets  of  molten  material  may 
have  become  trapped  at  the  core-mantle  interface.  These  molten  regions  may  affect 
large-scale  tectonic  movements  at  the  surface  by  altering  the  interaction  between  Earth’s 
core  and  mantle.  ❶ 

[B]  To  study  the  extreme  conditions  deep  within  Earth,  Fiquet  and  his  team  used 

the 

to  replicate 

intense  heat  and  pressure  at 

the  mantle-core 
diamond  anvil  cells 
boundary.  They  subjected  mineral  samples,  including  magnesium  oxides,  iron,  and  silicon 
to  pressures  exceeding  140  gigapascals—over  a  million  times  atmospheric  pressure  at  sea 
level—and  temperatures  over  5,000  Kelvin  (8,540  degrees  Fahrenheit).  By  utilizing  x-ray 
diffraction  techniques,  the  team  monitored  the  changes  in  the  minerals’  atomic  structures, 

observing  the  transition  from  solid  to  liquid  phases,  identifying  the  melting  point  of  the 
mantle  minerals  at  around  4,200  Kelvin  (7,100  degrees  Fahrenheit).  ❷  These  findings 
not  only  validate  long-standing  theories  about  partial  melting  in  Earth’s  interior  but  also 

highlight  the  dynamics  of  these  molten  layers  in  driving  tectonic  activity  and  shaping 

Earth’s  interior  structure. 

[C]  ❸  Traditional  volcanoes,  like  those  in  the  Pacific  Ring  of  Fire,  are  typically  fueled 
by  magma  generated  from 
the 
movement  of  tectonic  plates.  In  contrast,  hot  spot  volcanoes,  such  as  those  in  Hawaii, 

the  upper  mantle  and  are  strongly 

influenced  by 

are  thought  to  derive  their  magma  from  much  deeper  plumes  of  molten  material  rising 

from  partially  melted  regions  near  the  core-mantle  boundary.  This  relationship  provides 
valuable  insights  into  how  Earth’s  internal  heat  influences  surface  volcanic  activity  and 

contributes  to  the  shaping  of  Earth’s  landscapes  over  millions  of  years. 

[D]  ❹  This  discovery  significantly  advances  our  understanding  of  Earth's 
structure,  while  highlighting  the  groundbreaking  techniques  used  to  study  conditions  that 

internal 

are  otherwise  inaccessible.  While  direct  sampling  from  the  mantle-core  boundary  remains 
impossible,  experiments  by  Fiquet  and  his  team  provide  crucial  data  about  the  physical 
and  chemical  properties  of  materials  deep  within  Earth.  ❺  These  findings  contribute  to  a 
clearer  understanding  into  the  complex  processes  occurring  within  Earth's  interior  and 
how  these  processes  impact  surface  phenomena,  such  as  volcanic  eruptions  and  tectonic 

movements.   

-  9  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

18.  (0.8  points)  Which  of  the  following  would  best  fit  in  blank  (1)  in  paragraph  [A]? 

①  geochemical
②  geographical
③  geological 
④  geomagnetic
⑤  geometric

19.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  NOT  true  about  the  research  design?

①  The  researchers  recreated  the  extreme  heat  and  pressure  of  the  mantle-core  boundary  using 

diamond  anvil  cells.

②  The  researcher  hypothesized  that  the  molten  layer  directly  causes  tectonic  shifts  and 

volcanic  eruptions  acting  as  a  driving  force.

③  The  researchers  employed  x-ray  diffraction  techniques  to  monitor  and  observe  changes  in 

the  atomic  structure  of  mantle  minerals.

④  The  study  utilized  high-pressure  experiments  to  simulate  conditions  deep  within  Earth  and   

to  identify  the  melting  point  of  mantle  minerals.

⑤  The  researchers  anchored  their  study  in  corroborating  long-standing  proposals  of  partial 

melting  within  Earth’s  interior,  which  had  previously  lacked  direct  experimental  evidence.

20.  (1.0  points)  The  following  sentence  is  removed  from  the  passage  above.  In  which  part 

may  it  be  inserted  to  support  the  argument  made  by  the  author?   

The  implications  of  this  discovery  extend  beyond  the  structure  of  Earth's  interior,  offering 
new  perspectives  on  the  origins  of  certain  volcanic  phenomena  and  tectonic  activity.

①  ❶ 

②  ❷

③  ❸

④  ❹

⑤  ❺ 

21.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  LEAST  likely  to  be  inferred  by  the  findings?

①  The  molten  layer  may  contain  physical  properties  distinct  from  the  solid  mantle,  revealing 

differences  in  composition  and  behavior. 

②  The  molten  layer  at  the  mantle-core  boundary  likely  acts  as  a  remnant  of  Earth’s  early 

molten  state,  providing  insights  into  the  structural  history  of  Earth.

③  Tectonic  shifts  and  volcanic  activity  are  interconnected  with  the  molten  layer  influencing 

mantle  dynamics  and  linking  deep  Earth  processes  to  surface  phenomena. 

④  Experimental  findings  suggest  that  the  physical  conditions  at  the  boundary  are  sufficient  to 

partially  melt  mantle  materials,  revealing  their  behavior  under  extreme  conditions.

⑤  Since  the  innovative  simulation  techniques  helped  identify  the  molten  layer,  they  open  up 

the  possibilities  of  building  computational  models  for  broader  applications.

-  10  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

※  Questions  22  through  25  are  based  on  the  following  passage.

[A]  In  November,  a  teenager  in  Fraser  Valley,  British  Columbia  sought  medical  care  for 

conjunctivitis  and  a  cough.  Six  days  later,  the  teen  was  put  on  a  ventilator  at  the  B.C. 

Children’s  Hospital  in  Vancouver  and  remained  in  critical  care  for  weeks.  An  illness  like 

this  wouldn’t  normally  make  headlines,  but  this  child  tested  positive  for  a  strain  of  bird 

flu,  called  H5N1,  which  infectious  disease  experts  worry  could  fuel  the  next  human 

pandemic.

[B]  The  virus  first  emerged  on  poultry  farms  in  Hong  Kong  in  1997,  where  it  killed 

nearly  100  percent  of  chickens,  causing  internal  bleeding  and  destroying  multiple  organs 

in  a  manner  chillingly  reminiscent  of  Ebola  in  humans.  Since  then,  successive  waves  of 

infection,  spread  by  wild  birds,  have  plagued  poultry  farms  around  the  world.

[C]  Recently,  however,  H5N1  took  an  unsettling  evolutionary  step  in  the  direction  of 

humans.  In  2022,  it  tore  through  a  population  of  sea  elephants  in  Argentina,  killing 

thousands  with  a  mortality  rate  of  97  percent.  It  was  the  first  time  H5N1  is  known  to 

have  taken  hold  in  a  mammalian  species.  Until  then,  people  and  other  mammals  who’d 

gotten  sick  had  caught  the  virus  through  contact  with  birds.  The  sea  elephants  were 

passing  it  to  one  another.  By  the  time  scientists  got  around  to  publishing  their  findings 

in  June,  H5N1  had  infected  another  mammalian  species:  dairy  cows.  Since  March,  the 

virus  has  spread  to  more  than  800  dairy  herds  in  16  states,  including  more  than  500  in 

California,  where  it  remains  uncontrolled.  On  December  18,  California  Governor  Gavin 

Newsome  declared  a  state  of  emergency  to  respond  to  the  outbreaks. 

[D]  In  the  U.S.,  at  least  61  people  have  caught  the  virus,  most  through  direct  contact 

with  birds  or  cows.  In  December,  a  child  in  Marin  County  who  drank  raw  (i.e. 

unpasteurized)  milk,  spiked  a  fever  and  vomited,  later  tested  positive  for  H5N1.  This 

week,  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC)  confirmed  the  first  “severe” 

bird  flu  case  in  the  US;  the  patient  had  been  exposed  to  sick  and  dead  birds  in  a 

backyard  flock.  Every  time  a  human  gets  sick,  the  virus  has  another  opportunity  to 

acquire  the  ability  to  spread  from  person-to-person.  Once  it  passes  that  milestone,  it 

could  start  a  pandemic.  There  is  no  evidence  that  H5N1  has  passed  that  grim  turning 

point.  It  may  never  make  this  leap.  But  “knowing  what  we  know  about  these  viruses, 

the 

trend 

is  not  good,”  says  Matthew  Binnicker,  a  microbiologist  specializing 

in 

respiratory  diseases  at  the  Mayo  Clinic  in  Rochester,  Minnesota,  adding  “serious  action” 

is  needed.  Experts  are  worried  about  two  main  ways  the  virus  could  start  spreading 

more  easily  between  people. 

-  11  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

22.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  true  based  on  the  passage  above?

①  The  first  known  infection  of  H5N1  occurred  in  sea  elephants  in  Argentina.
②  The  first  mammalian  H5N1  infections  were  observed  in  1997  in  Hong  Kong.
③  A 

in  British  Columbia 

teenager 

tested  positive  for  H5N1,  spurring  concerns  among 

infectious  disease  experts.

④  No  instances  of  H5N1  have  ever  been  recorded  in  mammals,  making  the  teenager’s  case 

in  British  Columbia  the  first  of  its  kind.

⑤  California  Governor  Gavin  Newsome  declared  a  state  of  emergency  to  respond  to  the 

outbreaks  in  which  dozens  of  people  were  infected. 

23.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  most  likely  to  be  inferred  about  H5N1’s  evolution 

and  spread  from  the  passage  above?

①    H5N1  is  no  longer  a  threat  to  poultry  but  remains  a  concern  for  mammals.
②  Once  humans  contract  H5N1,  they  have  a  nearly  100%  survival  rate,  similar  to  sea 

elephants.

③  Global  health  agencies  have  determined  that  H5N1  can  infect  humans  without  genetic 

modification.

④  The  virus’s  ability  to  spread  among  mammals  raises  the  possibility  of  human-to-human 

transmission. 

⑤  The  fact  that  the  sea  elephants  were  passing  the  virus  to  one  another  serves  as  evidence 

that  the  virus  does  not  cause  cross-species  transmission.

24.  (1.1  points)  Which  of  the  following  is  NOT  true  according  to  the  passage  above? 

①  The  CDC  confirmed  the  first  severe  bird  flu  case  in  the  U.S.
②  In  December,  a  child  contracted  H5N1  after  drinking  raw,  unpasteurized  milk.
③  A  teenager  tested  positive  for  H5N1  after  seeking  treatment  for  conjunctivitis  and  a  cough.
④  All  human  cases  of  H5N1  in  California  so  far  have  involved  exposure  to  infected 

mammals  like  cows.

⑤  At  least  61  people  in  the  U.S.  have  tested  positive  for  H5N1,  mostly  through  direct 

contact  with  infected  birds  or  cows.

25.  (1.0  points)  What  does  “this  leap”  in  paragraph  [D]  most  likely  refer  to?

①  The  virus  mutating  to  spread  easily  from  human  to  human
②  The  ability  of  H5N1  to  spread  from  wild  birds  to  domestic  poultry
③  The  emergence  of  H5N1  in  a  mammalian  species  for  the  first  time
④  The  declaration  of  H5N1  as  a  pandemic  by  global  health  authorities
⑤  The  virus  evolving  to  spread  directly  between  mammals  without  bird  contact

-  12  -

 
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

※  문제  26  –  48

물음에  답하세요.

[26]  [0.8점]    cos cos 



 에  관한  내용  중  옳지  않은  것을  모두  고르세요.

① cos   sin   

②   




③ sin   sin 

④ cos   cos 



⑤ sin   


[27]  [0.8점]  를   에  대한  함수라  할  때,  음함수        의  점        에서  


를 

구하세요. 

①  


②  

③ 

④ 

⑤ 

[28]  [1.0점]  곡선    






sin       ( 



≤  ≤ )  의  길이를  구하세요. 


① 


② 

③ 


④ 

⑤ 

[29]  [1.1점]  자연수  에  대하여,   






tan   라고  하자.          일  때,  

  을 

∞

  

구하세요.


① 


② 


③ 


④ 


⑤ 

[30]  [1.0점]  연속인  순증가  함수(strictly  increasing  function)       →     가      , 



     ,  그리고  
얼마인지  구하세요.  단,   는   의  역함수이다. 



       을  만족한다.  이때  






 

     는 

① 

② 

③ 

④ 

⑤ 

-  13  -

   
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

[31]  [1.0점]  실수로  이루어진  수열  에  대한  <보기>의  내용  중  옳은  것을  모두  고르세요.

< 보기 >

가. 무한급수  

 이  조건부  수렴하면,  

  은  발산한다. 

나. 무한급수  

  

 이  수렴하면,  


  

∞

   은  수렴한다. 

다. 무한급수  

  이  발산하면,  

 은  발산한다. 

라. 무한급수  

   이  수렴하면,  

 은  수렴한다.



  

∞

  

∞

  

∞

  

∞

∞

∞

∞

  

  

① 개

② 개

③ 개

④ 개

⑤ 개

[32]  [0.8점]  <아래>  극한을  구하세요. 

< 아래 >


  sin 

  

lim
 → 

① 발산

② 


③ 


④ 


⑤ 

[33]  [0.8점]  극한값  lim
 → 

tan      




 

 의  값을  구하세요.

  을  만족하는  최소  차수의  다항식   에  대해, 


①  


②  


③  


④ 


⑤ 

[34]  [1.0점]    에서      





sin 
  

      의  합을  구하세요.

  라고  하자.      

∞

  

   로  표현될  때,  계수 


① 


② 


③ 


④ 

⑤ 

-  14  -

   
   
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

[35]  [1.0점]  실수  전체에서  <아래>와  같이  정의된  함수   에  대하여  ″   을  구하세요.

< 아래 >

   








  



  ≠ 

 

  

① 

④ 

②  

⑤ 존재하지  않음


③  

[36]  [1.1점]  <보기>에서  수렴하는  이상  적분(improper  integral)은  모두  몇  개인지  고르세요.

∞

∞

  
  

  

 ln  

  

가. 



다. 



< 보기 >

∞

나. 





  

  



라. 



cos 


 

① 개

② 개

③ 개

④ 개

⑤ 개

[37]  [1.0점]  함수      







 tan 

    tan 

    ≠  and  ≠ 



    or   

  일  때, 

      ≠   을  구하세요.

    ① 

② 

③  

④ 

⑤ 발산

[38]  [1.0점]  <아래>  적분을  구하세요. 

< 아래 >







 



  

 


① 

ln

② ln


③ 

ln

④ ln


⑤ 

-  15  -

2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

[39]  [1.0점]  평면상의  영역      ≤  ≤   ≤  ≤ 모양의  얇은  판(lamina)이  있다. 

임의의  각  점에서의  밀도가   좌표의  제곱에  비례한다고  할  때,  이  얇은  판의  질량중심의 

-좌표를  구하세요.


① 


② 


③ 


④ 


⑤ 

[40]  [1.1점]  평면   에서  매개변수곡선      cos     sin  sin    ≤  ≤   과  축으로 

둘러싸인  영역을  축을  중심으로  회전하여  얻은  입체의  부피를  구하세요. 

① 


② 

③ 

④ 


⑤ 

[41]  [1.0점]  매끄러운  곡선    가  두  점       을  지날  때,  lim

 
 
  ′

 → ∞ 

  


∙ 

의  최솟값을  구하세요.

    ①  

② 

③ 

④ 

⑤ 

[42]  [1.0점]  곡면          위의  점       에서의  접평면은   축과    에서 

만난다.  이때  의  값을  구하세요. 


①  


②  


③ 

④ 


⑤ 

[43]  [1.0점]  <아래>  멱급수의  수렴  반경을  구하세요.

< 아래 >

 





∞



  


① 


② 

③ 


④ 

⑤ 

-  16  -

   
   
 
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

[44]  [1.0점]  곡선          상에서  함수       의  최댓값을  ,  최솟값을     이라  할  때, 

    의  값을  구하세요.


① 


② 


③ 


④ 


⑤ 

[45]  [1.1점]  평면의  곡선    가  그림과  같이  점    에서  출발하여  선분을  따라  점 까지 

진행한  뒤,  원        의  오른쪽  반원을  따라  점   까지  진행한다. 

        이때,  <아래>  선적분을  구하세요. 

< 아래 >





     


① 

④ 


 

 

②   


⑤ 


 


③ 


 

[46]  [1.1점]  평면의  네  점               을  꼭짓점으로  가지는  평행사변형  영역을 

  라  할  때,  <아래>  값을  구하세요.

< 아래 >





 

    ① 

② 

③ 

④ 

⑤ 

-  17  -

         
         
2025학년도  편입학  수강능력시험

자연계열 

[47]  [1.1점]  평면상의  벡터장  F      i   j      일  때,  양의  방향을  따르는  타원 

        에서의  <아래>  선적분을  구하세요.

< 아래 >





F ⋅  r


① 

② 

③ 


④ 

⑤ 

[48]  [1.1점]   에서  평면      위로의  반구면    

     의  영역을    라  할  때,  <아래> 

곡면적분을  구하세요.

< 아래 >





  

    ① 

② 

③ 

④ 

⑤ 

※  문제  49  –  50

영역         ≤  에서  정의된  함수 

             

에  관하여  물음에  답하세요.

[49]  [1.0점]  함수   의  



 에서의  선형  근사(linear  approximation)  함수는 
 

          이다.  이때       의  값을  구하세요.

①  

②  

③  

④ 

⑤ 

[50]  [1.1점]  함수   는  영역  의  내부에서    (가)    개의  임계점을  가지며,  그  중  극대점은    (나)    개, 

극소점은    (다)    개이고,  모든  안장점(saddle  point)에서의  함숫값의  합은    (라)    이다. 

        (가),  (나),  (다),  (라)의  합을  구하세요.

① 

② 

③ 

④ 

⑤ 

-  18  -

   
