
===== 864b9bf1-2018_____________A______.pdf =====
한양대학교 2018학년도 편입학전형 문제지

영

어

문제 유형

A

1. 문제지 상단의 문제 유형을 표시하시오.

[5-7] 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 알맞은 어휘를 고르시오.

① A형

② B형

[2-3] 어법에 맞는 것을 고르시오.

5. Like animals, fungi are heterotrophs: they cannot make

their own food as plants and algae can. But unlike animals,

fungi do not ingest their food. Instead, a fungus absorbs

nutrients from the environment outside of its body. Many

2. Typical of

the grassland dwellers of

the continent

fungi do this by _____________ hydrolytic enzymes into

their surroundings. These enzymes break down complex

molecules to smaller organic compounds that the fungi can

absorb into their bodies and use. Other fungi use enzymes

to penetrate the walls of cells, enabling the fungi to absorb

nutrients from the cells. Collectively, the different enzymes

found in various fungal species can digest compounds from

a wide range of sources, living or dead. [3점]

① ingesting
③ deflecting

② secreting
④ permeating

6. One cannot either imaginatively or practically pursue

“class demands” as if the working class has one set of

united and homogeneous material

interests.

It makes

neither political nor theoretical sense to imagine an

undifferentiated working class demanding a larger share

of the pie, to be divided among them with the same ratios

of _____________ as currently exist based on racism and

sexism. Just as black workers cannot stand in for the

whole, neither can skilled white workers. Each group is

exploited in a specific manner, and to different degrees.

① impediment
③ exploitation

② competition
④ remuneration

_____________ or pronghorn.

① the American antelope

② the American antelope is

③ is the American antelope

④ it is the American antelope

3. Behaviorist John B. Watson claimed that even innate

behavior could be altered by conditioning. But it was the

Chinese psychologist Zing-Yang Kuo ① who people believe

took the behaviorist

idea to its extreme, denying the

existence of instinct as an explanation for behavior. Kuo

that

instinct was just

felt
a convenient way ② to
psychologists to explain behavior that did not ﬁt current

theory. Kuo’s most well-known experiments ③ involved

in rearing kittens—some raised from birth in cages with

rats, others introduced to rats at later stages. He investigated

a series of results that could help ④ himself to prove his

hypothesis. [3점]

4. 밑줄 친 단어의 뜻으로 가장 알맞은 것을 고르시오.

Over the last decade H5N1 avian influenza has spread

dramatically across the globe. It has become effectively

endemic in a number of countries in Asia, and presents a

regular threat to avian populations in different parts of

the world through bird migration and marketing links.

① easy to see or notice

② acceptable by many people

③ tested and shown to be true

④ present in a particular place all the time

영 어                                        

2

7. The Christian attitude toward commerce held that money

9. Primitive man had a repertoire of survival skills that

was evil, that according to St. Augustine “Business is in

included reading body language. Etiquette and culture have

itself an evil,” that profit beyond a minimum necessary to

blunted that natural human ability. Add to those factors the

support the dealer was avarice, that to make money out

complexity of spoken language and modern conventions

of money by charging interest on a loan was the sin of

related to body language and the result is this: few people

___________, that buying goods wholesale and selling them

today can read body language well. Most of the time, we don’t

unchanged at a higher retail price was immoral and

even know what our own bodies are doing. Human body

condemned by cannon law, that,

in short, St. Jerome’s

language is more closely tied to _______________________. I

dictum was final: “A man who is a merchant can seldom

don’t think about how to pick up my glass when I drink, or

if ever please God.”

① greed
③ gluttony

② usury
④ indolence

how to start my car. Our brains are so complex, with multiple

subprograms running at all times, that it is difficult to have

complete control over every twitch and tap. It is difficult for

us to even remember what we’ve done if the action has

[8-22] 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 알맞은 것을 고르시오.

reached the point of habit. [3점]

8. Mandela’s awareness of his iconic status can appear

cynical, even cunningly postmodern, but at the time, it would

most accurately have been described as politic. He saw that

it was important to stand as a “symbolic expression of the

confused desires of his people”: that embattled anti-colonial

① habit than inborn talent

② ritual than planned behavior

③ discipline than social control

④ intuition than visual memory

nationalist movements required compelling unifying images.

10. Gandhi’s attack on poverty as an obstacle to freedom needs

Mandela in his own autobiography constructs his life on the

highlighting, especially since in his personal life he was given

assumption that the national

leader’s story is interlocked

to practicing voluntary poverty. How could one practice

with the nation’s story, specifically for him the story of

voluntary poverty and at the same time be against poverty?

anti-apartheid resistance. In his view, the leader, the first

The answer to this apparent inconsistency can be found in

democratic

president-to-be,

embodies

the

nation.

his religious psychology: his voluntary poverty was an act of

Significantly, during his later years in office, Mandela often

penance, even of spiritual protest against the involuntary

came across in ways that suggested ___________________.

poverty of the Indian masses. It was not an approval, much

① a story of a self-made man

② a self bound up in a public mask

③ a symbolic image associated with postmodernism

④ a commanding way of presenting oneself internationally

less a(n)

(A)

of

involuntary poverty. However,

misunderstandings exist. Even a perceptive observer of India

was moved to remark that Gandhi thought of poverty as “a

solution to injustice or excess.” Gandhi did not think of poverty

in this way. He voluntarily accepted the lifestyle of the poor

in order to demonstrate his solidarity with them. Poverty was

no more

(B)

to him than it was to them. It was a product

of an unjust social order, removable by human effort. [3점]

(A)

① exaltation

② eradication

③ glorification

④ mortification

(B)

meaningless

intolerable

natural

spiritual

영 어                                        

3

11.

In development economics,

the question whether aid

13. Communities are not natural species, that is, kinds of things

contributed to economic growth was hotly debated after

that exist independently of human intervention, but are formed

Mosley identified this as the “micro-macro” paradox. He could

by choices persons make to cooperate in various ways. Still,

not find any statistically significant

(A)

between

since communities are formed by the common pursuit of

development aid and the economic growth rate of recipient

purposes, two communities will be essentially distinct if those

countries, taking into account other factors that cause growth.

communities pursue different types of purposes or if they

Mosley defended aid nonetheless, as benefits at the micro level

pursue a common purpose in fundamentally different ways.

were

often shown to

be

substantial

and

essential.

Thus, we can pick out instances of communities and ask what

Nevertheless, economic growth was supposed to be the engine

they are. And if we arrive at an answer, we can then ask about

of future development that would make aid unnecessary, and

the ethical and political implications of such differences. Since

if aid would not contribute to economic development, it could

the forming of some communities is a way in which human

turn out to be ineffective in the longer run and not have

beings are fulfilled, it follows that the way our choices are

meaning beyond just the benefits of a specific and localized

related to communities, and to the structures required by their

project or intervention. Even if a project has significant short

purposes, is morally significant. For example, even generic

term outcomes, but it does not contribute to economic growth,

friendship—that is, friendship not between spouses, and not

it could be argued that the

(B)

of its benefits is

founded on a quite specific connection such as paternity or

questionable.

(A)

① conflict

② balance

③ correlation

④ discrepancy

(B)

effect

intent

sustainability

substantiality

the

teacher-pupil

relationship—has

a

structure

.[3점]

① that is not defined by individual choices
② definite enough so that some actions develop it and others

harm it

③ diverse enough so that common purpose cannot define

a distinctive kind of community

④ that is established by what fundamentally distinguishes

12. Do heroes belong in the modern world? Or are they a

it from other personal relationships

liability, an anachronism, even an embarrassment? In the

hands of the Greeks and Shakespeare, these questions are

complex and the answers are various. The leading figures in

Sophocles have some things in common. Antigone, Oedipus,

Electra: they cling to a high idea of themselves. They are

passionate, purposive, resolute, rigorous, indomitable, difficult.

They command admiration, in an old sense of the term that

connotes

but not necessarily approval,

moral or otherwise. Or to use an associated word familiar to

Shakespeare and his contemporaries, they provide “mirrors”

for us to contemplate. They are exemplary, but they are not

necessarily examples

to follow. They are glamorous,

charismatic, spectacular. But

in tragedy they become a

14. The puzzle in bird movement which is not often explained

is ____________________________. When an oarsman propels

his boat forwards he beats his oars backwards against the

water, and the reaction drives the boat on. A paddle steamer

does the same with its paddles, and a duck or swan with its

feet. But if we carefully watch any bird such as a rook, peewit,

or seagull, whose wings move slowly enough for the nature

of their movement to be observed, we cannot detect the

slightest backward and forward movement of the wings; it

appears to be purely up and down. Such a movement of wings

seems appropriate enough for keeping up, if that were all that

had to be done. But it is at least equally important to move

problem, not least for those around them, sisters like Ismene

rapidly forward.

in Antigone, rulers like Theseus in OedipusatColonus. [3점]

① pity
③ wonder

② pride
④ humiliation

① what methods different types of birds use to quickly move

forward

② how the movement of a bird is different from that of a

paddle steamer

③ what roles the wings of birds play when they increase

their speed forward

④ how the movement of a bird is accomplished without

backward beats upon the air

영 어                                        

4

15. History is a social process,
in which individuals are
engaged as social beings; and the imaginary antithesis

between society and the individual results in no more than
drawn across our path to confuse our

thinking. The reciprocal process of interaction between the
historian and his facts, what I have called the dialogue between
is a dialogue not between abstract and
present and past,

isolated individuals, but between the society of today and the
society of yesterday. [3점]

① distraction
③ exoneration

② indignation
④ enlightenment

16. As I had done before I copied passages and then tried to

write them out again from memory, I tried altering words or
the order in which they were set. I found that the only possible

words were those Swift had used and that the order in which
he had placed them was the only possible order. It is an
has one grave defect:
impeccable prose. But

it is apt to be dull. Swift’s prose is like a French canal, bordered
with poplars, that runs through a gracious and undulating

country. Its tranquil charm fills you with satisfaction, but it
neither excites the emotions nor stimulates the imagination.

You go on and on and presently you are a trifle bored. [3점]

① lucidity
③ perfection

② terseness
④ naturalness

17. The architect who proposes to run with technology knows
, and that, in order to
now that he will be
keep up, he may have to emulate the Futurists and discard

his whole cultural load, including the professional garments
by which he is recognized as an architect. If, on the other hand,

he decides not to do this, he may find that a technological
culture has decided to go on without him. [3점]

① obsolete

② silenced

③ out of fashion

④ in fast company

18. A basic problem with utilitarianism, long sensed, is that

one may easily conceive of circumstances in which the
oppression of some small class of people would contribute
maximally to the aggregate general welfare. For instance, it

is relatively easy to think of circumstances in which aggregate
welfare would be maximized by enslaving or even killing off

a few people. We might find utilitarianism __________ for that
reason, but our feelings of moral repugnance are not yet an

argument against it.

① obscure
③ obnoxious

② attractive
④ convincing

19. Poets who write in the “wrong language”

(even

exceedingly populous languages like Chinese) must engage in

the peculiar act of imagining a world poetry and placing

themselves within it. And, although it is supposedly free of

all local history, this “world poetry” turns out, unsurprisingly,

to be a version of Anglo-American modernism or French

modernism, depending on which wave of colonial culture first

washed over the intellectuals of the country in question. This

situation is the quintessence of cultural

, when

an essentially local tradition (Anglo-European) is widely taken

for granted as universal.

① wisdom
③ variation

② learning
④ hegemony

20. One of the commonest forms of madness is the desire to

be noticed, the pleasure derived from being noticed. Perhaps

it is not merely common, but universal. In its mildest form

it doubtless is universal. Every child is pleased at being

noticed; many intolerable children put in their whole time in

distressing and idiotic effort to attract the attention of visitors;

boys are always “showing off”; apparently all men and women

are glad and grateful when they find that they have done a

thing which has lifted them for a moment out of

and

caused wondering talk. This common madness can develop,

by nurture, into a hunger for notoriety in one, for fame in

another. [3점]

① obscurity
③ corruption

② stupidity
④ miscalculation

21. Philosophy, which had once summoned all sciences to its

aid in making a coherent image of the world and an alluring

picture of the good, found its task of

too

stupendous for

its courage,

ran away from all

these

battlefronts of truth, and hid itself in recondite and narrow

lanes, timidly secure from the issues and responsibilities of

life.

① coordination
③ humanization

② observation
④ reconstruction

22. But how could the brain be shaped by cultural experiences?

Here is where the utility of the brain as computer metaphor

really starts to break down. Unlike computers, brains continue

to change, grow, and rewrite themselves in response to their

experiences. Brains are highly

throughout our lives,

especially when we are young. Our hardware changes in

response to what we do.

① rigid
③ elusive

② plastic
④ computational

영 어                                        

5

23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

25.

If interstellar travelers have not left artifacts for us to find,

we might still be able to detect their powerful, interstellar

spacecraft. Spacecraft capable of traveling at speeds close

to the speed of light would likely have enormous engines

powered by energy sources such as nuclear fission, nuclear

fusion, or matter-antimatter drives. These engines would

leave telltale signs of their operation―signs that might be

detectable at distances of hundreds or even thousands of

One of the key issues in any approach to initial teacher

preparation is the balance to be struck between training

and education.

(A) This change in nomenclature seeks to avoid the

negative associations “trainee” and “training” may be said

to imply, with their connotations of the transmission of a

pre-determined set of behaviors to novices who are largely

light-years away. Although only a limited search for distant

seen as blank slate.

rockets has been made, this type of phenomenon might be

inadvertently discovered in the course of more conventional

astronomical research.

① Energy Sources for Spacecraft Engines

(B) For example, novice teachers on the British PGCE

program, which confers qualified teacher status and allows

graduates to work in the state-school system, are more

commonly referred to today as “student teachers” than as

② Advantages of Conventional Astronomical Research

“trainee teachers.”

③ Interstellar Travelers: Their Artifacts and Spacecraft

(C) That said, the former term has fallen out of favor

④ Footprints Left in Space: Searching Interstellar Spacecraft

somewhat over the past few years, at least among teacher

[24-25] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 순서로 가장 적절한 것을

고르시오.

24.

The first and most important decision any advertiser

makes

is

to advertise. Many people

think large

companies have no choice but to advertise. This is

simply wrong.

educators. [3점]

① (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)

② (C) － (B) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)

[26-27] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.

26. The words “friend” and “friendship” are used to describe

a wide range of human relationships. Further complicating

matters, friendship is unique in its capacity to arise as a

free-standing relationship on its own terms between two

(A) Nowadays this is often called “viral marketing.”

persons, or as a sincerely lived dimension of other

Viral marketing tends to be most successful when a

relationships, such as the friendship developed between

business

is

relatively young and newsworthy:

even

siblings, spouses, parents and children, or coworkers. ① In

Google had to start to advertise, using traditional media,

these instances friendship is not a necessary part of the

in 2009.

relationship; countless such bonds exist devoid of friendship.

(B) Many of

the world’s largest businesses―especially

② It is a negotiated attachment between persons that always

heavy industrial businesses like steel manufacturers or

reflects shared personal dispositions and material sociocultural

shipbuilders―do no advertising at all, or so little it

possibilities. ③ Despite and perhaps because of its pervasive

hardly

counts. They

normally

have

no

need

to

presence in human life, the necessity of “friendship” itself

communicate with the public at large, and they have so

intellectually captivates a number of researchers. ④ You

few key customers they can reach them personally.

cannot force or require friendship of any genuine emotional

(C) Some other large companies, of which Google is

validity between people; and friendship may be restricted,

perhaps the most famous example, get their name and

prohibited, or even unthinkable in certain circumstances. [3점]

what they offer across to the public in other ways than

by advertising, usually “word of mouth” recommendation.

① (B) － (C) － (A)
③ (C) － (A) － (B)

② (B) － (A) － (C)
④ (C) － (B) － (A)

영 어                                        

6

27. Even in its earliest days, psychology meant different

things to different people.

In the US,

its roots lay in

philosophy, so the approach taken was speculative and

theoretical.

In Europe,

the study was rooted in the

sciences, so the emphasis was on examining mental

processes under

controlled laboratory conditions. ①

However, even the research of these more scientifically

oriented psychologists was limited by the introspective

nature of their methods. ② Pioneers became the subject

of

their own investigations, effectively restricting the

range of

topics to those that could be observed in

29. 다음 글을 바탕으로 유추할 때 적절하지 않은 것을 고르시오.

Any velocity once imparted to a moving body will be

rigidly maintained as long as the external causes of

acceleration or retardation are removed, a condition which is

found only on horizontal planes; for in the case of planes

which slope downwards there is already a cause of

acceleration; while on planes sloping upwards there is

retardation;

from this it

follows that motion along a

horizontal plane is perceptual; for, if the velocity be uniform,

it cannot be diminished or slackened, much less destroyed.

themselves. ③ The simplest way to approach the vast

[3점]

subject of psychology is to take a look at some of its

① The velocity shows whether or not external forces are

main movements that occurred in roughly chronological

acting on a body.

order from its roots in philosophy to the psychology of

difference. ④ Although they used scientific methods and

their theories laid the foundations for the new science,

② A pull in the direction of motion increases the speed of

the moving body.

③ If no external forces act on a body, every body perseveres

in its state of uniform motion.

many in the next generation of psychologists found their

④ A push in the direction opposite to that of motion

processes too subjective, and began to look for a more

decreases the speed of the moving body.

objective methodology.

28. 다음의 주어진 문장이 들어갈 가장 알맞은 곳을 고르시오.

When stated so starkly,

this

idea will appear

problematical to many.

① (A)
③ (C)

② (B)
④ (D)

Theory is built upon an underlying assumption that

specific events are not unique and do not have unique

causes. Rather, we assume that most important events are

single instances of broader patterns. (A) If we want to

prevent wars, we must have some notion of what causes

them. This requires a supposition that different wars have

something in common. (B) For example, it might seem

dubious to equate the causes of World War I with the

[30-31] 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.

30. Linguists repeatedly run up against

the myth that

working-class people and the less educated members of the

middle class speak a simpler or coarser language. This is a

pernicious

illusion arising from the

effortlessness

of

conversation. Ordinary speech, like color vision or walking,

is a paradigm of engineering excellence―a technology that

works so well that the user takes its outcome for granted,

unaware of the complicated machinery hidden behind the

panels. Behind such “simple” sentences as Where did he

go? and The guy I met killed himself, used automatically

by any English speaker, are dozens of subroutines that

arrange the words to express the meaning. Despite decades

of effort, no artificially engineered language system comes

close to duplicating the person in the street. [3점]

causes of World War II. (C) However, if the lessons of

① It is an illusion that working-class people speak a ruder

the past are to be applied to the problems of today, we

and plainer language.

must assume that events in the future are somehow related

to those in the past. There is a big difference between

assuming that similar events have something in common

and assuming that they are identical. (D) To develop a

theory of wars, we only need assume that there are some

causes in common.

② We are often aware of the complicated machinery hidden

behind ordinary speech that works so well.

③ An engineer has not yet developed an artificially
constructed language system close to ordinary speech.
④ Dozens of subroutines are arranged to express the

meaning in such a “simple” sentence as Wheredidhego?

영 어                                        

7

31. The starling flies from its net to a feeding site, searches

[32-33] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

for a beak-full of leatherjackets by probing in the grass,

and then takes them home to the nestlings. The starling’s

problem is when to give up. If it gives up too early it

spends a lot of

time travelling for a small

load;

if

it

struggles on too long it spends time in ineffective search

which could be better spent by going home to dump its load

and starting again. A similar problem is faced by a worker

honeybee as it flies from flower to flower filling its honey

crop with nectar to take back to the hive. Bees also often

return to the hive with less than the maximum load they

could carry and their behaviour can be explained by a

model similar

to that used for

the starling. There is,

however, an important difference:

the bee experiences a

curve of diminishing returns neither because the nectar in

its crop makes it

less able to suck more flowers nor

because of resource depression but because the weight of

nectar in the crop adds an appreciable energetic cost to

flight. The more the bee loads up its crop the more of its

load it will burn up as fuel before it gets home. [3점]

Among the central preoccupations of Durkheim is the

question of what holds societies together. His answer

points to the crucial

role of

law in promoting and

maintaining this social

(A)

. He shows how, as

society advances from religion to secularism, and from

collectivism to individualism, law becomes concerned less

with punishment

than compensation. But punishment

performs a significant role in expressing the collective

moral attitudes by which social solidarity is preserved.

He distinguishes between what he

calls mechanical

solidarity and organic solidarity. The former exists in

simple, homogeneous societies which have a uniformity

of values and lack any significant division of

labour.

These uncomplicated communities tend to be collective

in nature. In advanced societies, however, where there is

division of labour, a high degree of

(B)

exists.

There is substantial differentiation, and collectivism is

replaced

by

individualism. These

forms

of

social

solidarity are, he argues, reflected in the law: classify

① The bee flies home with less than the maximum load it

the different types of law and you will find the different

can carry.

② The bee knows when to go home and empty its crop to

maximize efficiency.

③ The starling’s best option is that it stays long enough

for the maximum load on each trip.

types

of

social

solidarity to which it

corresponds.

According to Durkheim, while mechanical

solidarity

operates in traditional and small-scale societies, organic

solidarity comes from individuals’ reliance on each other

④ There is the difference between bees and starlings in

to perform their specified tasks. 

maximizing the currency of carrying a load.

32. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① Types of Social Solidarity, Types of Society

② Coming Full Circle?: Law and Punishment

③ Division of Labor: How Societies Have Progressed
④ Making

Compromise:

Room for

Solidarity &

Individuality

33. 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은?

(A)

① bond

② cohesion

③ solidarity

④ homogeneity

(B)

diversity

interdependence

collectivism

distinctiveness

영 어                                        

8

[34-35] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

[36-37] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

of

for

any

study

species,

from fully understood. Nevertheless,

The nervous system of vertebrates is characterized by a
hollow, dorsal nerve cord that ends in the head region
as an enlargement, the brain. Even in its most primitive
form this cord and its attached nerves are the result of
further evolution
evolutionary specialization, and their
from lower to higher vertebrate classes is a process that
is far
the basic
arrangements are similar
in all vertebrates, and the
study of lower animals gives insight into the form and
the nervous system of higher animals.
structure of
Moreover,
the
the
embryological development of
the nervous system is
indispensable for an understanding of adult morphology.
In any vertebrate two chief parts of the nervous system
may be distinguished. These are the central nervous
system consisting of the brain and spinal cord, and the
the cranial,
peripheral nervous system, consisting of
spinal, and peripheral nerves, together with their motor
and sensory endings. The
term “autonomic nervous
system” refers to the parts of the central and peripheral
systems that supply and regulate the activity of cardiac
muscle, smooth muscle, and many glands. The nervous
system is composed of many millions of nerve and glial
cells, together with blood vessels and a small amount of
connective tissue. The nerve cells, or “neurons,” are
characterized by many processes and are specialized in
that
to a great degree the phenomena of
irritability and conductivity. The glial cells of the central
nervous system are supporting cells collectively termed
“neuroglia.” They are characterized by short processes
that have special relationships to neurons, blood vessels,
cells in the
and connective
peripheral nervous
termed “neurilemmal”
cells.

tissue. The comparable

they exhibit

system are

* vertebrate 척추가 있는, 척추동물

34. 위 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① the evolution of nerve cells

② the advancement of bioengineering

③ the nervous system of vertebrates

④ the functions of the automatic nervous system

In many ways persistence brings us back full circle to

regulation. When a toy becomes too predictable, it is no longer

fun. If a parent comes every time the infant makes a sound,

calling the parent would require no effort. What engages

learners best is a challenge whose solution is possible but not

simple. In order to see such a challenge through to solution,

the infant or toddler must be able to tolerate some frustration.

The adult partner assists in this by helping the child stay

focused and excited as well as able to pause and gather more

information. In an intriguing twist, researchers wondered

whether

the

child’s

competence affected the mother’s

investment and satisfaction in supporting her child. They

looked at children at 6 and 18 months to measure their ability

to complete physical and social

tasks

through some

frustration. They also measured the mother’s satisfaction and

sense of competence as a parent. Competent infants had

confident mothers. Less competent infants had less satisfied

mothers. This might have been because the mothers had

expectations that were too high or fewer skills to support their

children’s efforts. Either way, it suggests the possibility of a

______________ nature to this approach to learning.

36. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 알맞은 표현은?

① biological
③ irreversible

② humanistic
④ transactional

37. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? [3점]

① The more expected a toy is, the less amused a child is.
② Children’s competence is related to the level of mothers’

satisfaction.

③ Tolerating frustration is required for learners to find a

possible but not simple solution.

④ The adult partner needs to immediately help infants or

toddlers find an answer for the challenge.

35. The author implies that a careful

biological
____________________. [3점]

structure

in

an

investigation of a
to

lead

embryo may

① improved research of the same structure in other species

② a better understanding of the fully developed structure
③ a method by which scientists can diagnose nervous

disease

④ discovering ways in which poor development can be

corrected

영 어                                      

9

[38-39] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

[40-41] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

The most important recent innovations have been associated

with the development of

the Internet and specialized

computer networks, which are already having considerable

impact

upon

collaborative work

patterns,

and

are

transforming the way architecture

is

conceived and

produced. Conventional models of the design and production

process picture a straightforward linear progression, much

like an old-style factory production line: from client’s brief

to architect’s concept―to client’s approval―to engineers’

input―to detailed working drawings, and so on to final

construction, all in discrete stages and all supposedly led by

the architect. By contrast, computer-based collaborative

networks operate much more like “self-organizing system,”

with clients, consultants and builders, who may be

geographically dispersed, all participating in key design and

production decisions from the very beginning. The key to

this complex and unpredictable process is the virtual

prototype, which functions both as a test bed and as a

communications medium, providing instant

feedback to

everyone on the effects of their proposed decisions. Like the

networks themselves, the thought process involved are more

likely to resemble analogical thinking than linear logical

thinking, with a premium on participants’ ability to jump

professional and technical boundaries and to make new

connections.

38. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① Design and Production in Architecture

② Work Pattern Changes in Architecture

③ Decision-Making Processes in Architecture

④ Development of Technology in Architecture

A person watching and analysing the behaviour of a

computer whose program had been lost might, in principle,

be able to reconstruct

the program or

its functional

equivalent. But

there is no way of knowing in which

language the program was originally written. The end

result is the same in any case: the computer performs some

useful task such as calculating square roots. A biologist

looking at an animal is in somewhat the same position as

an engineer looking at a computer running a lost program.

The animal is behaving in what appears to be an organized,

purposeful way, as if it was obeying a program, an orderly

sequence of imperative instructions. The animal’s program

has not actually been lost, for it never was written out.

Rather, natural selection cobbled together the equivalent of

a

hard-wired machine

code

program,

by

favouring

mutations that altered successive generations of nervous

systems to behave. Nevertheless, it is convenient for us to

think of the animal as ‘obeying’ a program ‘written’ in some

easily understood language such as English. One of the

things we can then do is to imagine alternative programs or

subroutines which might

‘compete’ with each other for

‘computer time’ in the nervous systems of the population.

40. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? [3점]

① Natural selection acts on a pool of alternative programs

or subroutines.

② There are many ways of knowing in which of the genes

an animal’s program was originally written.

③ The animal is behaving in an apparently effective and

well-planed way as if it was obeying the program.
④ In explaining animal behavior mechanisms, the author
uses the analogy of a computer running a lost program.

39. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? [3점]

41. The author uses the words “cobbled together” to imply that

① The architectural design and production progression is

the equivalent of a hard-wired machine code program natural

linear in conventional models.

② The virtual prototype enables the participants to make

new connections beyond boundaries.

③ The Internet and specialized computer networks have

brought about innovative models in architecture.

④ The decision-making processes in architectural design
and production do not involve multiple stakeholders in

conventional models.

section made is something

.

① firmly fastened
② lost permanently
③ useful but not perfect
④ translated into a set of rules


===== 9e513fa6-2022_____________A____________.pdf =====
한양대학교 2022학년도 편입학전형 문제지

영

어

자연

문제 유형

A

1. 문제지 상단의 문제 유형을 표시하시오.

7. I felt offended when some stranger tried to be officious

① Ⓐ

② Ⓑ

by asking private questions while waiting for the bank

service. She kept offering unwanted advice about my career,

and even tried to advise me about my marriage, telling me

[2-3] 밑줄 친 부분 중 어법 상 틀린 것을 고르시오.

about dos and don’ts.

2. Cerebral cortex neurons are ①the only ②type of cell

① judicious

② convivial

③ courteous

③what ④we can confidently say ⑤is never replaced.

④ meddlesome

⑤ sophisticated

[3점]

3. ①Synthetic rubies and diamonds ②have ③the same

[8-25] 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

④hard and composition as the ⑤real stones.

[4-7] 밑줄 친 단어의 뜻과 가장 가까운 것을 고르시오.

4. We usually depict the Renaissance as a clear, bubbling
river of novelty that broke the medieval dam of rigidified

scholasticism.

① overwhelmed

② religious

③ formalistic

④ uneasy

⑤ peripheral

5. In recent years, top officials have left government and

lobbyists,
entered Washington’s mercenary culture of
consultants, advisers, and other well-paid partisans of

special
interests. Strangely, activities most Americans
outside Washington would consider clearly repugnant are,

these days in the nation’s capital, considered to be merely
the way business is done.

① greedy

④ erudite

② austere

③ laconic

⑤ circumspect

6. Saint Laurent sought a radical shift

from current

trends. He wanted
black-and-white
designs. The designer says, “I worked on the volumes,
just pure,
proportions and colors. Nothing ostentatious:

pure, graphic

simple lines. I wanted to send a very clear message:
No jewels, no accessories.”

① lucid

② fastidious

③ flamboyant

④ discernible

⑤ discriminant

8. When there is a clear theoretical rationale for creating
distinct categories based on a meaningful break point,

then __________ a continuous variable may be justified;
for example, having groups of ‘high risk’ or ‘low risk’

for diabetes based on the doctor’s assessment of body
mass index, family history, and lifestyle.

① defining

④ isolating

② selecting

⑤ analyzing

③ dichotomizing

9. Tibet is renowned as the most _________ country in

the world. It is surrounded to the south, the west and
the north by massive mountain ranges, ranging from six

thousand meters above sea-level along the
to eight
Himalaya and the Karakoram. The whole country is
traversed by subsidiary mountain ranges which reach to

six thousand meters and more.

① totalitarian

② mythological

③ populous

④ spiritual

⑤ inaccessible

10. Comedy is tragedy plus time. Any terrible misfortune

can be made __________ given a suitable period to recover
and reassess the situation. The film director Mel Brooks

had his own version:
Comedy is when you fall into an open sewer and die.’

‘Tragedy is when I cut my finger.

① hilarious

④ tolerable

② solemn

⑤ insipid

③ touching

영 어                                        

2

things out

Is beauty a property of

11.
there in the
world? Perhaps beauty is created by people of influence,
who use beauty to maintain their own power or to make
money by selling things. These ideas of beauty are
irreconcilable with a
common view that beauty is
fundamentally _________.

① lucrative

④ useless

② powerful

⑤ spiritual

③ symmetric

12. Finally Thomas returned and after several days of
meticulous work he brought Smith the
tablet, now
beautifully legible. Smith took the tablet and began to
read over the lines which Thomas had brought to light;
and when he saw that they contained the portion of the
legend he had hoped to find there, he said, “I am the
first man to read that after more than two thousand
years of _____________.” Setting the tablet on the table,
he jumped up and rushed about
the room in a great
state of excitement.

① controversy

② observation

③ interpretation

④ commemoration ⑤ oblivion

the

link

view of

predominant

between
13. The
self-esteem and violence has been that low self-esteem
contributes to high violence. However,
research from
several perspectives has demonstrated a very different
pattern. Certain individuals with high self-esteem are
most prone to anger and are most aggressive when their
high self-image is threatened. Specifically,
is high
self-esteem people who react most violently to threats to
their high self-esteem is inflated
their self-esteem―if
In other words,
(undeserved), unstable, or

tentative.

it

are the dangerous people.

① atheists

② antagonists

③ anarchists

④ narcissists

⑤ protagonists

14. Contrary to popular belief, the determining factor in the
importance of food pleasure is not derived from the taste of
foods produced in a given place but
from their cultural
it is not the intense
contexts or definitions. For example,
flavor of a homegrown orange that pleases, rather the idea
that it is homegrown, which is a cultural value. Taste is
.
chemical and biological; food pleasure is

① perceptional

② irresistible

③ conditioned

④ insatiable

⑤ transitory

15. Psychoanalytic theory is not alone in positing that

early developmental experiences play a role in shaping
the theory is unique in the degree to
personality, but

it

as
which
determinants of personality development and dynamics.

experiences

emphasizes

childhood

In its strongest form, psychoanalytic theory hypothesizes
that early experiences―even those occurring during the
first weeks or months of life―set in motion personality

processes that are to a great extent
. In
other words, the events of early childhood are thought to

create a trajectory that almost invariably culminates in a
predictable set of adult character traits. [3점]

① integral

④ irregular

② immutable

③ complicated

⑤ unforeseeable

16. Self-perception theory provides an explanation for
emotion by suggesting that people infer their emotions

by observing their bodies and their behaviors. In other
words, people’s emotions and other feelings come from
level of
such actions as facial expressions, postures,

arousal

and

behaviors.

are
of behavior. People are angry because they

this way,

feelings

In

scowl and are happy because they smile―this is the
self-perception effect. Our behavior changes our attitude!

① patterns

② assessments

③ motivations

④ consequences ⑤ implementations

judgement,

17.
In central decision-making, Mao’s dominance was
manifested by his ability to prevail over his colleagues,
to subdue them, and to manipulate them, against their
better
into willing and even enthusiastic
supporters of his vision and policies. Yet, this does not
mean Mao was _________, and he did not always seek
to dominate everything. There were times when he
decided to lie low and did not assert himself. Often his
mind had not been made up, so he did not always
least allowed his
pronounce the last word, or he at
colleagues the benefit of the doubt.

① sincere

② artless

③ impudent

④ disarming

⑤ omnipotent

영 어                                        

3

18. There is a sort of obscurity that you find in writers.

20. Almost throughout history it was generally accepted

It

is due to

. People often write obscurely

that creativity ‘just happens’. Ideas float into the mind of

because they have never taken the trouble to learn to

their

own

accord,

unpredictably,

and

no

further

write clearly. You would have thought

that men who

explanation is

possible. The most

common cartoon

passed their lives in the study of the great masters of

depiction of

this phenomenon is of an electric bulb

literature would be sufficiently sensitive to the beauty of

suddenly lighting up in the brain. But this is altogether

language

to write

if not beautifully at

least with

too simple a view of creativity. First,

it suggests ideas

perspicuity. Yet you will

find in their works sentence

come about without prior cogitation. But

it would be

after sentence that you must read twice to discover the

hard to find a great creative thinker who did not say

sense. Often you can only guess at it, for the writers

ideas are the result of long cogitation. Sir Isaac Newton

have evidently not said what they intended. [3점]

did not simply discover gravity when he saw an apple

① willfulness

② negligence

③ inconsistency

thinking about the nature of gravity for years.

Indeed,

falling, as the famous anecdote claims. He had been

④ verbosity

⑤ jargon

when asked how he came by his discoveries, Newton

replied ‘By always thinking about them’. Yes, new ideas

do come to highly creative people out of the blue. But

19. As

a disease

like

acquired immune deficiency

they come because creative people constantly seek them,

syndrome (AIDS) spreads,

for example,

the rate at

both consciously and subconsciously. Second,

the light

which it spreads depends on how many people are

bulb image suggests that

ideas arrive fully formed in

already infected, how many have yet to be infected, and

the brain. This seldom happens. Albert Einstein took at

what

conditions

allow interaction

between

the

least 10 years to develop his theory of relativity. Most

not-yet-infecteds and the

infecteds. With very few

creativity involves the development and execution of

infected the rate of spread is very small because so few

original

insights. Pablo Picasso constantly changed and

cannot quickly infect a very large number of others. As

transformed his mural masterpiece Guernica as he

the number of

infecteds grows, so does the rate of

painted it. Professor Robert Weisberg, who has written

spread of the disease, because there are more to spread

extensively about this, defines creativity as

in

it. On the other hand,

if nearly everyone had already

nature, and that is an excellent way to think of it. [3점]

① astute

② prosaic

③ ephemeral

④ incremental

⑤ spontaneous

been infected, the rate of spread would be small because

there would be few left to spread it to. To complicate

theoretical matters further, as the disease has generated

widespread concern, norms governing sexual

contact

have begun to change,

influencing the probabilities of

transmission of

the virus.

In mathematical

terms,

the

implication is that the rate of change of the proportion

infected (i.e., the rate of spread of the disease) is not

constant over time, nor is it a constant proportion of

change in any variable in the system.

In short,

the

process is inherently

. [3점]

① gradual

④ rigorous

② circular

③ nonlinear

⑤ irreversible

영 어                                        

4

21. Why

do we

forget

our

dreams

so

quickly?

23. According to Newton’s laws,

there is no unique

Psychologists still don’t understand the true function of

standard of rest. One could equally well say that body A

dreaming. However,

it

almost

certainly

relates

to

was at rest and body B was moving at constant speed

memory,

either by helping to consolidate

the day’s

with respect to body A, or that body B was at rest and

events or enabling us to forget unwanted detail so we

body A was moving. For example, if one sets aside for a

don’t become overloaded,

in which case recalling our

moment the rotation of the earth and its orbit round the

dreams might not be helpful. But perhaps the main

sun, one could say that the earth was at rest and that a

reason is that most of our waking memories make sense

train on it was traveling north at ninety miles per hour

and are

. When I try to remember what

or that the train was at rest and the earth was moving

I had for breakfast

today,

I

can connect

that

to

south at ninety miles per hour.

If one

carried out

memories of getting up,

feeding the cats and lots of

experiments with moving bodies on the train, all Newton’s

other small events. But dreams are usually illogical and

laws would still hold. For instance, playing Ping-Pong on

their events are unrelated. So when we try to recall

the train, one would find that the ball obeyed Newton’s

them, we

cannot

follow a sensible

thread and the

laws just like a ball on a table by the track. So there is

previously vivid details just slip away.

no way to tell

. [3점]

① infallible

② interlinked

③ vulnerable

① when the train or the earth comes to rest

④ irreversible

⑤ straightforward

② whether it is the train or the earth that moves in

22. The

theory of

“spiral of

silence” proposed that

individuals regularly survey their social environments for

cues about

the prevailing balance among contending

viewpoints. This is said to be a “quasi-statistical” process

by which individuals would reach an approximate estimate

of

the

support

for a particular position or political

candidate. The

estimates

often derive

from personal

experience such as conversation with others and the

firsthand observation such as political rallies, parades, and

use

of

the mass media. Motivation

for

this

quasi-statistical surveillance is often

. People

are

inclined to avoid being perceived by others as

out-of-step, ill-informed, and isolated from others.

① social survival

② justice of journalism

inconstant speed

③ whether it is the train or the earth that is moving

④ whether

it
accelerating

is the train or

the earth that

is

⑤ which constant outside action is at work to keep

the train or the earth moving

24. From a global perspective,

increased production of

food, however efficient, will not

relieve the principal

causes of

famine and hunger, for these forces involve

powerlessness, destitution, civil war, and oppression. The

road to food security lies in making governments less

corrupt, reducing ethnic and racial rivalries and hatreds,

ending

civil wars,

improving

education,

providing

employment,

and

halting

gender

discrimination.

advances in genetic engineering, a peaceful and just

. With or without

the

latest

③ surveillance on political actions

world could feed its people easily.

④ the objectivity and accuracy of journalism

⑤ increasing influence of mass media

① Food is not scarce but demand is

② Food security is a function of social justice

③ Too many people are involved in food production and

supply

④ Food output is being held back by a lack of effective

supply in the marketplace

⑤ Biotechnology can save a large number of people

who are chronically undernourished

 
영 어                                        

25.

In practice, criminological

theories that

focus on

crime rates and patterns often have had relatively little

to say about

the causes of

individual behavior. For

example, variations in income inequality from one place

to another have been identified by criminologists as

being related to rates of predatory property crime such

as burglary, automobile theft, and larceny. Many of the

studies that have reported this finding have had little to

say about how income inequality, defined as the unequal

distribution of income among an entire population of an

area or locale, affects individuals. In short, explanations

of crime rate variations often have failed to explain

. [3점]

① why the crime rates have been increasing in rural

communities

5

27. 다음 글의 내용과 거리가 가장 먼 것은? [3점]

How often do you look at your fingers? In all

likelihood,

not very often. But take a look right now at your right

hand. With your palm facing you,

look at the length of

your fingers. Compare the length of the second digit with

the length of the fourth digit. The second digit is your

index finger, the fourth digit is your ring finger. You’ll

very likely see that the fourth digit is longer than the

second. It is for most people, especially on the right hand.

If you can compare yourself with someone of the opposite

sex, see who has a longer ring finger relative to the

index finger. Males in general have the advantage―they

tend to have a longer ring finger compared with their

index finger than women do. This gender difference is

also true in baboons. What causes this difference between

② how criminological

theories about crime rates and

the genders? Genetics is one explanation, with the same

crime patterns have often been developed independently

set of genes influencing both genitals and digit

length.

③ how various social factors provide considerable insight

But

in addition,

fetal hormone exposure―in particular

into the causes of lawbreaking

androgens―plays a critical role.

④ why crime rates are important social

indicators that

reflect the quality of life in different regions

① Most people tend to use the ring finger more frequently

⑤ how the explanatory variables they identify get inside

than the index finger, especially for the right hand.

the heads of offenders

② Genes are one of the main causes for digit differences.

26. 빈칸에 공동으로 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은?

③ Gender difference in the lengths of

index and ring

fingers is observed in nonhuman species.

④ Males’ fourth digit tends to be longer than the second digit.

⑤ Both genes and fetal hormone exposure collectively

In many activities we try to estimate the chances of

cause differences in digit length.

success or failure. Without this kind of

thinking,

a

doctor

could not

diagnose

a

disease

from the

symptoms, nor

can he

or

she prescribe

the best

medication for

a disease

that has been diagnosed.

Likewise,

insurance companies cannot tailor-fit the cost

of

car

insurance

to different persons with varying

personal profiles. This kind of

thinking is

applicable to a very large body of events; for instance,

games of chance and many “events” which are the

outcomes of experiments in physics.

① wishful

④ critical

② probabilistic

③ disoriented

⑤ long-term

영 어                                        

6

[28-30] 다음 글의 내용과 거리가 가장 먼 것을 고르시오.

30. The problem with old, or traditional, film histories is

interest

28. The late 19th century is a crucial period in the gradual
transition from qualitative to quantitative methods in the
light. Despite the enthusiasm of a few
measurement of
scientists like William Abney, general
remained
restrained. Part of
the reason remained the difficulties
imposed by vision itself. The human eye was increasingly
identified as a very poor absolute detector of light intensity.
The perception of brightness was found to vary with colour,
the mental and physical condition of the observer and the
brightness itself. By the first decade of the 20th century
practitioners had evolved a thorough mistrust of ‘subjective’
visual methods
towards
‘objective’ physical methods that relied upon chemical or
interactions of light. This simplistic identification
electrical
of ‘physical’ as ‘trustworthy, unbiased and desirable’ came to
be a recurring theme in the subject. [3점]

observation

inclined

and

of

① Light can be measured subjectively, based on the

brightness seen by the human eye.

② Scientists discovered the limitations imposed by the

human eye.

that
Their histories are governed by at

they are informally written by amateur historians.
two underlying

least

focuses the
assumptions: a teleological assumption that
historian’s attention only on films that display technical
innovations, and an essentialist assumption proposing that

these technical achievements are important because they
exploit cinema’s essence, or inherent capabilities. Traditional

film histories therefore consist of lists of films organized
technical
linearly,

films displaying little

from primitive

innovation (which are not perceived to
achievement or
exploit
sophisticated (more
cinema’s
‘cinematic’) films. Furthermore, these histories are usually

to more

essence)

global and general, based on the writer’s selective memory
films or on faulty secondary sources, resulting in a
of

vague and patchy history of film. [3점]

① Old film histories focus the historian’s attention on

films that display technical innovations.

② For old film histories, the technical achievements are

important because they exploit cinema’s essence.

③ Old film histories usually develop global and general

③ Light measurement could be perturbed by the mental

areas of film history.

and physical condition of the observer.

④ During the late 19th century, many scientists were

enthusiastic about the measurement of light.

⑤ By the first decade of the 20th century, scientists had
turned to increasingly elaborate strategies to minimize
the effect of the observer.

29. As philosopher of science Karl Popper has emphasized,
a good scientific theory is characterized by the fact that it
makes a number of predictions that could in principle be
disproved or
falsified by observation. Each time new
experiments are observed to agree with the predictions the
theory survives, and our confidence in it is increased; but
if ever a new observation is found to disagree, we have to
abandon or modify the theory. Einstein’s general theory of
relativity, for example, predicted a slightly different motion
from Newton’s theory. The fact that Einstein’s predictions
matched what was seen, while Newton’s did not, was one
of the crucial confirmations of the new theory. [3점]

① Any scientific theory is provisional and reflects the

best of our knowledge at the moment.

② Scientific theory should make predictions that can be
tested, and the theory rejected if these predictions are
shown to be incorrect.

③ Newton’s theory was falsified by Einstein’s predictions,

which matched what was seen.

④ For a theory to be considered scientific it must be able

to be tested and conceivably proven false.

④ Old film histories carry out the research using rigorous,

systematic, and explicit methods.

⑤ Old film histories are based on the writer’s selective

memory of films.

31. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

Suppose, to take a simple example,

I don’t know what

bachelors are. Now,

if I am not to just take your word

for it, I have to check up on whatever you tell me. For

you might be mistaken and tell me that bachelors are

married men. To know that you are wrong, I must know

what bachelors are. Moreover,

I must know what

the

words ‘unmarried’,

‘married’ mean,

if I am to understand

what is being said when you claim that a bachelor is an

unmarried man. But if I know that much about marriage,

then I know what a bachelor is. At best,

I

just don’t

know the word ‘bachelor’.

① Anything offered as a definition will be susceptible to

counter-examples.

② To clarify the term at
comparison or contrast.

issue is to be subject

to

③ To define the term at issue, one directs one’s attention

to the context of one’s discussion.

④ Contrasts and examples contribute to understanding.

⑤ One must understand a definition in order to judge its

⑤ Scientific knowledge based on sufficient observation

accuracy.

can be justified without falsifying it.

영 어                                        

7

[32-33] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

[34-35] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

32. Games such as soccer, baseball, cricket and hockey,
together with athletics, are quite clearly understood to be

sports. Many people consider angling to be a sport
although in some of its forms it does not involve great

exercise. Walking can be considered a sport or simply a
it certainly
leisure activity which involves exercise, but
represents a significant market in footwear and clothing.

Similarly, much of the participation in sailing, horse riding,
cycling and motoring is a pastime rather than a sport but

would generally be considered in the sport and leisure
market. Gardening is an extremely popular leisure activity

but is not thought of as sport. [3점]

① The majority of the population participates in some form

of sports and leisure on a regular basis.

② Large sums of money have been invested in improved

facilities for sports and leisure activities.

③ The widening of the range of available activities has
adversely affected some traditional sports and leisure.
④ The sports and leisure participants are often prepared to
pay whatever it takes to have the best equipment at the
top end of the market.

⑤ It is rather difficult to define the boundaries of what

constitutes sports and leisure in the market.

in which we consider

The potency of pleasure as a driver of behavior
in
mammals is obvious in my cats. We humans, more so than
cats, can temper our pleasure-addled brains. One way to
keep ourselves in check is by framing our pleasures. We
can change our emotional experience of objects by altering
them. This human
the context
propensity is well understood by religious institutions that
admonish us to be wary of our “base” pleasures. Framing
means that we are not slaves to ou r. Our cognitive
systems can reach down into our pleasure centers and
rejigger our pleasure experiences. Another way that humans
temper pleasure is by considering the passage of time. If I
place a bowl of
they do not
ruminate over the fact that I have been traveling a lot, so
perhaps it would be wise to save some food for later.
Hedonists that they are, they have little regard for delayed
gratification. By contrast, any medical student, presumably
is a grand master in
among the smartest of our youth,
delayed gratification. They are willing to forego years of
adequate sleep, regular meals, and decent pay for some
future reward.

food in front of my cats,

34. 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① we are addicted to pleasure experiences

② we drive pleasure into gratification

33. In listening to a piece of music, we hear a pattern of

③ we are not slaves to our sensations

and we draw conclusions

notes
the underlying
structures that gave rise to those notes: structures of
tonality, meter, and other things. These judgments are often

about

somewhat uncertain; and this uncertainty applies not just at
the moment that the judgment is made, but to the way it is

represented in memory.
In the development section of a
sonata movement, for example, we may be uncertain as to

what key we are really in―and this ambiguity is an
experience. The probabilistic
important part of musical
nature of music perception applies not only to these

underlying structures, but to the note pattern itself. Certain
note patterns are probable, and others are not. [3점]

① In listening to music, probabilistic judgments are

shaped by our past experience.

② In listening to music, perception is an inferential and

uncertain process.

④ we give free expression to sensations

⑤ we are not protectors of sensations

35. 윗글의 내용과 거리가 먼 것은?

① Humans are superior to cats in keeping pleasure in

check without any thought of reward.

② Cats can hardly change their pleasure experiences by

rejiggering the context.

③ Cats are all about pleasure-seeking.

④ Humans

tend

to

pursue

rewards

from delayed

gratification.

⑤ Humans’
pleasures.

cognitive

systems

can

rearrange

our

③ In listening to music, our knowledge of probabilities
the

from regularities

large

part,

in

in

comes,
environment.

④ In listening to music, a pattern of sound energy

impacts our ears.

⑤ In listening to music, the memory embodies a particular

perception and understanding.

영 어                                        

8

[36-37] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

[38-39] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

in

contexts,”

“In terms of keeping us healthy, disgust

In the late 1860s, Charles Darwin proposed that being
grossed out could have an evolutionary purpose. Disgust,
he wrote, was inborn and involuntary, and it evolved to
prevent our ancestors from eating spoiled food that
might kill
the early
them. Darwin hypothesized that
humans most prone to (A)revulsion survived to pass on
their genes, while the more nutritionally daring died off.
Since then, scientists have identified different
types of
disgust and have explored how they affect the way we
behave. The research shows that Darwin was basically
immune
right: disgust is a major facet of the behavioral
system.
is
is a helpful
associated with (B)more infections, so it
Joshua
says
disease-relevant
emotion
Ackerman, an associate professor of psychology at
the
University
instance,
researchers reported that people more (C)prone to disgust
have indeed fared better during the COVID-19 pandemic,
probably because they are inclined to engage in more
hygienic actions like hand-washing. However, disgust is
(D)far more complex than even Darwin imagined. Studies
also show that what we find disgusting stems from a
patchwork of
life
experiences that depend on our culture and environment.
And for some people, disgust can go too far, preventing
us from doing the gross things that actually keep us
healthy, such as eating probiotic-rich fermented foods. “It
is
can
because
______________________
like
associated with aversion to (E)unfamiliar
food, some of which could actually improve our health
and immune functioning,” Ackerman says.

innate responses and a variety of

it
things,

of Michigan.

January,

also

for

be

In

36. 밑줄 친 (A) ∼ (E) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지

않은 것은? [3점]

of

of

by

that

speaks,

‘celebrity’, which

‘Genius’ is a concept that now seems rather old-fashioned; it
has dropped out of usage somewhat. It appears to have been
superseded
seems
correspondingly impossible to avoid. But is there any relation
between the two? A visitor from Mars might be forgiven for
assuming so. But we know better; we know that celebrity is
no such guarantee of great ability but is rather a product of
our media-saturated society, our thirst for new heroes and
that of the market for new brands. What’s more, the very
notion of celebrity incorporates an understanding of it as―at
least
the
in part―fabricated, phoney, undeserved; while
notion of genius, especially artistic genius, seems entirely
different. This
genuine,
rather,
something
thus the popularity of Van
authentic, even unrecognized:
Gogh, the epitome of the lonely genius, who sold only one
painting in his lifetime, and who shot himself. The myth of
Van Gogh is such an enduring one because it is a myth;
that is, a story of a kind that we need, because it reassures
us both of
its authenticity, and of our
humanity,
in that we can recognize this truth even if Van
Gogh’s own contemporaries did not. What about the present
celebrity of some contemporary artists such as Tracey Emin,
whose name has acquired a recognizability unprecedented in
the history of British art. There is much, after all, in Emin’s
public persona that resembles that of Van Gogh: suffering
and violence, and the outrageous behaviour. Yet there have
been very few critics to have had a good word to say about
Emin’s art,
let alone to declare her a genius. Are we then
about to repeat the mistake of Van Gogh’s first audiences; is
this a hasty judgement on Emin? Why is she a celebrity, if
critical estimation of
that status is
her
such
become
and
unprecedented celebrities in recent years, and what does this
say about the status of the artist in our society?

the truth of art,

art? Why

artists

have

her

① (A)

② (B)

③ (C)

④ (D)

⑤ (E)

38. 윗글의 내용과 가장 거리가 먼 것은? [3점]

37. 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① a no-brainer

② a tip of the iceberg

③ a hard nut to crack

④ a double-edged sword

⑤ a left-handed compliment

① The notion of celebrity has some negative connotations.

② The term ‘celebrity’ is more commonly used than

‘genius’ nowadays.

③ Van Gogh and Tracey Emin have similar artistic tastes

even if they lived in different times.

④ Tracey Emin has become one of the best-known public

figures in Britain.

⑤ Becoming a celebrity has less to do with giftedness
and more to do with how they are presented in the
media.

39. 문맥상 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은?

① in pursuit of

② in control of

③ in tune with

④ at odds with ⑤ in association with

9

영 어                                        

[40-41] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

in nature. Perspective

The Egyptian painting was substantially an enlargement of
the hieroglyph. There was no attempt to place objects in the
setting which they hold
and
light-and-shade were disregarded. Objects, of whatever
nature, were shown in flat profile. In the human figure the
shoulders were square, the hips slight, the legs and arms
long, the feet and hands flat. The head, legs, and arms were
shown in profile, while the chest and eye were twisted to
show the flat
front view. There are only one or two
full-faced figures among the remains of Egyptian painting.
After the outline was drawn the enclosed space was filled in
with plain color. In the absence of perspective, prominence
was given to an important figure, like that of the king, by
making it much larger than the other figures. This may be
seen in any of the battle-pieces of Rameses II, in which the
monarch in his chariot is a giant where his followers are
mere pygmies. Moreover, receding figures of men or of
horses were given by multiplied outlines of legs, or heads,
placed before, or after, or raised above one another. Multiple
viewpoints are created by showing most of the horses’ body
in profile, but turning a portion of the horses’ head so that it
seems to point directly at the viewer.

40. 윗글의 내용과 가장 거리가 먼 것은? [3점]

① Egyptian paintings created complex compositions with

people in realistic poses.

② Egyptian artists used plain colors to fill

the enclosed

space.

③ The most important figures were depicted on a grand

scale.

④ Egyptian paintings treated light-and-shade as unworthy

of regard.

⑤ Egyptian artists painted human heads, legs, and arms in

profile.

41. 아래의 빈 칸에 들어갈 것으로 윗글의 내용과 가장

거리가 먼 것은? [3점]

In the absence of perspective, _____________________.

① figures were overlapped or stacked one above the other

② Egyptian artists showed multiple viewpoints at the same

time

③ Egyptian paintings created the illusion of depth and

space on a flat surface

④ a portion of the animal’s head was turned as if it were

pointing directly at the viewer

⑤ Egyptian artists used size to denote importance


===== 66b53801-2019_____________A______.pdf =====
한양대학교 2019학년도 편입학전형 문제지

영

어

문제 유형

A

1. 문제지 상단의 문제 유형을 표시하시오.

[5-19] 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① A형

② B형

2. 어법상 틀린 것을 고르시오.

Mesopotamia and Assyria,

if not actually the cradle of

mankind, were  the theatre ① on which the descendants

of Noah performed their first conspicuous part. Events

② that are so various and important must

invest

the

countries ③ which they occurred with a deep interest;

and that portion of

them,

in particular, ④ which has

reference to the early postdiluvian ages,  cannot fail to

excite the curiosity of those ⑤ who delight in marking

the moral progress of mankind.

[3-4] 어법상 맞는 것을 고르시오.

3.

primarily a government provider

has since grown into a huge conglomerate consisting of

a catering business and a number of

retail stores,

which

now receive

preferential

treatment

from

government agencies. [3점]

① Beginning as

③ While begun a

② What began as

④ Did it begin as

⑤ In spite of its beginning as

4. The sharp rise in peanut and other food allergies in

adolescents has led scientists and doctors ① looking for

possible causes and ② contributed factors. One idea

gaining support

is the “hygiene hypothesis,” which

suggests

that

the human immune

system requires

contact with a wide range of environmental pathogens

in order

to

strengthen ③ themselves.

In a home

environment

that ④ kept

largely sterile particularly

through the use of antibacterial soap and sprays, the

body does not

learn to recognize and later combat

some harmful viruses and bacteria. The absence of

germs to fight, some theorize, ⑤ makes the immune

system begin

focusing on

other, more

innocuous

substances such as peanuts, milk, and eggs.

5. The modest attire and ascetic

lifestyle of

the

medieval monk

portrayed

by

ancient manuscripts

uncovered in the early 1940s would make one believe

that becoming a monk a few centuries ago required a

rather

nature to match their everyday routines.

① innocent

④ oblique

② austere

⑤ zealous

③ egoistic

6. The wealthy donor was known for his annual acts

of largesse throughout the community, but even more

was the fact

that he was willing to get

his hands dirty and serve the needy through hard

physical

labor as well as through endowments and

gifts.

① laudable

④ ludicrous

② verifiable

③ ironic

⑤ tragic

7. Tulips are not

to Holland. In fact, tulips

did not arrive in Western Europe until

the sixteenth

century. While those first bulbs came from Turkey,

where

tulips have been cultivated since

the

early

second century,

the plants probably originated in the

rugged mountainous regions surrounding the Black Sea.

① related

④ symbolic

② burdensome

③ profitable

⑤ indigenous

8. Discovered in 2001, the mimic octopus is a creature

whose survival abilities are as unique as they are

versatile. This

talented

cephalopod

is

capable

of

imitating several different species of creatures found in

its environment, and it does so for different purposes.

It imitates a crab to get close enough to catch and eat

one,

it imitates toxic fish to avoid being eaten itself,

and it can imitate a predator sea snake to scare off

trespassers. The shape-shifting creature’s

selection from among multiple forms is an exceptionally

rare trait among animals.

① genetic

② random

③ adverse

④ conscious

⑤ extensive

영 어                                        

2

9. Comets have always evoked fear and awe and

12. Pluralism permeates modern societies,

the mixed

superstition. Their occasional apparitions disturbingly

blessing of

their differentiation and openness.

If

the

challenged the notion of an unalterable and divinely

accompanying diversity contributes to life’s richness,

it

ordered Cosmos.

It seemed

that a

also produces many of its ___________―compelling us

spectacular

streak of milk-white

flame,

rising and

to choose between rival obligations, goals, principles

setting with the stars night after night, was not there

and virtues. Growing social pluralism also unsettles the

for a reason, and did not hold some portent for human

theory and practice of politics. Modern states become

affairs. So the idea arose that they were harbingers of

increasingly heterogeneous as their citizens hold ever

disaster, auguries of divine wrath―that

they foretold

more divergent and often incompatible identities,

ideals

the deaths of princes, the fall of kingdoms.

and interests. Public, no less than private, life confronts

① evident

② invisible

③ trivial

problematic, and occasionally tragic, choices. [3점]

④ temporary

⑤ inconceivable

① woes

② resources

③ outcomes

④ conclusions

⑤ improvements

10. The Sanskrit language, whatever be its antiquity, is

of a wonderful structure; more perfect than the Greek,

more copious than the Latin, and more exquisitely

13. In research you hope that the data is true, but the

refined than either, yet bearing to both of

them a

interpretation of

it

requires discussion, debate, and

stronger ___________, both in the roots of verbs and in

argument, and so scientists go to conferences a lot, and

the forms of grammar, than could possibly have been

present

their work and argue about

it. Yes,

the

produced by accident;

so

strong indeed,

that no

presentations and formal

lectures at scientific meetings

philologer could examine them all without believing

can be dreadfully important, but―and this is a trade

them to have sprung from some common source.

secret―they can be breathtakingly

. Sometimes

① affinity

④ scrutiny

② effect

③ risk

⑤ incongruity

11. Neuroscientists studying the brain may be a little
worn out with the amount of stories they hear of time

slowing down at
are alarming and fearful

the scene of an accident. Accidents
things. For those tumbling

over a bike or a precipice, our brain finds plenty of
themselves upon
space for new memories to imprint

the outer layer of our brain. We remember them as
significant events with lots of vivid action, and when
it
we reframe that narrative in our own heads, or tell

to others, there appears to be so much going on that it
simply must have taken longer than the split second it

actually did. Compared to familiar occurrences that
have _________ in the outer layer of our brain until we

no longer have to think about
them, a sudden new
event will require more of our brain’s attention. The
unfamiliar shape of a woman as she crosses a painted

white line,
brakes and passers-by―these are unusual

the loose chips of gravel,

the shrieks of
things to

astonishing results are mired in slides so dense and

incomprehensible that they make you want to poke the

free conference pen in your eye, or strangle yourself

with the name-tag lanyard.

① boring

② illuminating

③ impartial

④ hypocritical

⑤ impecunious

14.

Interpreting data on controversial

issues generated

from live, as opposed to automated, telephone polls can

be complicated by the fact that responders sometimes

(A)

their views to live pollsters if they believe

those views may be considered socially unacceptable. In

contrast, automated polling may

(B)

the stigma

these responders feel, and generate more accurate data.

(A)

① reveal

② dedicate

③ distort

④ expound

(B)

underestimate

exacerbate

reinforce

diminish

minimize

process when one is trying to limit
vulnerable flesh. [3점]

the damage to

⑤ misrepresent

① risen

② faded

③ changed

④ scattered

⑤ hardened

영 어                                        

3

15. With the inception in the 1950s of nuclear reactors

able

to

power

electrical

generators,

there were

predictions of a future with a virtually unlimited supply

① gestures are the same across all cultures

② humans are capable of choosing gestures on their own

③ gesturing is a useful means of conveying visual

of cheap power that would usher in an age of universal

information

prosperity.

(A)

, such predictions were naive in

④ humans are blessed with the ability to create a wide

that they neglected to consider some technical realities

variety of gestures

that make

power generators

incorporating nuclear

⑤ gesturing is more effective in conveying a message than

reactors more expensive to build and operate than

conventional oil or coal

fuelled generators, such as

disposal

of waste

products

and

the

need

for

(B)

in monitoring.

any words you can use

(A)

① In the long run

② In hindsight

③ In this vein

④ In general

⑤ To recap

(B)

success

vigilance

engineers

validation

scrutiny

16. Theories are essential tools for scholars. Theories

help

(A)

thinking about a phenomenon by

highlighting key ideas

and by providing carefully

crafted definitions that can be shared by all scholars as

they build knowledge

about

their

phenomenon of

interest. Theories can

(B)

which effects will

occur

under

certain

situations.

Theories

can

(C)

effects by revealing the factors that lead to

those effects and showing how those factors work

together. [3점]

(A)

① explain

② explain

③ organize

④ organize

⑤ predict

(B)

organize

predict

predict

explain

organize

(C)

predict

organize

explain

predict

explain

18. Toulmin rejected the prevailing models of argument

based

on

formal

logic

in

favor

of

a

very

audience-based courtroom model. Toulmin’s courtroom

model differs from formal

logic in that it assumes that

all

assertions

and assumptions

are

contestable by

“opposing counsel” and that all

final “verdicts” about

the persuasiveness of the opposing arguments will be

rendered by a neutral third party, a judge or jury. As

writers, keeping in mind the “opposing counsel” forces

us to anticipate counterarguments and to question our

assumptions. Keeping in mind the judge and jury

reminds

us

to

answer

opposing arguments

fully,

without

rancor, and to present positive reasons for

supporting our case as well as negative reasons for

disbelieving

the

opposing

case. Above

all

else,

Toulmin’s model reminds us

                           . [3점]

① of the profound influence of the legal system on the

development of logic

② not to miss the underlying assumptions that turn into a

logical structure

③ not to construct an argument that appeals only to those

who already agree with us

④ of the danger of too much inappropriate building on the

17. When you describe an object, you frequently use

opposing argument

gestures to illustrate what

the object

is like. Your

⑤ not to leap from information about a situation to a

conclusion about that situation without any sort of general
principle to justify that move

listener finds it easier to understand what you’re saying

when you let your body create a picture of the object

rather than relying on words alone. If you’re describing

a round object,

like a ball, for example, you may hold

your hands in front of yourself with your

fingers

arched

upward

and

your

thumbs

pointing down.

Describing a square building you may draw vertical

and horizontal

lines with a flat hand, cutting through

the space like a knife. The point is that

.

영 어                                        

4

19. There is an inextricable evolutionary link between

① Nineteenth-century historians were obsessive about facts

justice and democracy. The ability of any justice

and documents.

system to accommodate the biological tension between

② All documents about the past are treated as historical

individual freedom and social norms depends to a great

facts by the historian.

extent on its own ability to develop those norms as

③ The necessity of establishing historical facts rests on the

. The best laws work because they

quality of the facts themselves.

efficiently

confer

and

express

enough

long-term

benefits to enough individuals that those individuals are

willing to remain in the group and pay the short-term

price of compliance. The genius of democracy is that it

provides a continuous feedback mechanism on these

social norms, constantly recalibrating them to current

individual preferences.

In effect, democracy creates a

market

for

the

governed,

in which

conflicting

preferences for individual

freedom and social restraint

compete freely to obtain optimal results. [3점]

① a free expression of social consensus

② a functional unit through which laws act

③ a means of shedding light on human nature

④ a biological tension out of which all of us evolved

⑤ a condition under which a free market is created

[20-21] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?

20. The nineteenth-century fetishism of

facts was

completed and justified by a fetishism of documents.

The documents were the Ark of the Covenant in the

temple of facts. The reverent historian approached them

with bowed head and spoke of them in awed tones. If

you find it in the documents,

it is so. But when we

get down to it, what do these documents―the decrees,

the treaties, the rent-rolls, the blue books, the official

correspondence, the private letters and diaries―tell us?

No document can tell us more than what the author of

the document thought, what he thought had happened,

and what he thought ought to happen or would happen.

None of this means anything until the historian has got

to work on it and deciphered it. The facts, whether

found in documents or not, have still to be processed

by the historian before he can make any use of them.

[3점]

* The Ark of the Covenant: (모세의 십계명을 새긴 돌을 넣은) 법궤

④ Knowledge of the past consists of elemental and

impersonal atoms which nothing can alter.

⑤ The treatment of documents as a historical fact depends

on the element of interpretation by historians.

21. The idea set

forth by French philosopher René

Descartes in 1637, that only people think (and therefore,

only people exist

in the moral universe)

is still so

pervasive in modern science that even Jane Goodall,

one of

the most widely recognized scientists in the

world, was too intimidated to publish some of her most

intriguing observations of wild chimpanzees for twenty

years. From her extensive studies at Gombe Stream

Reserve in Tanzania, she had many times observed

wild chimpanzees purposely deceiving one another, for

example

stifling a food cry to keep others

from

discovering some fruit. Her long delay in writing it

stemmed from a fear that other scientists would accuse

her of anthropomorphizing―projecting “human” feelings

onto―her study subjects, a cardinal sin in animal

science. I have spoken with other researchers at Gombe

who still haven’t published some of their findings from

the 1970s,

fearing their

scientific

colleagues would

never believe them.

① René Descartes could not account for the moral dignity

of animals.

② Chimpanzees can be called intellectual beings for their

ability to purposely deceive one another.

③ The idea of animals with thoughts, feelings, and

personalities still upsets some scientists.

④ Scientists must accurately describe a large class of
observations to make a good theory about animals.

⑤ Jane Goodall has published the most intriguing

observations of wild chimpanzees for twenty years.

 
영 어                                        

5

[22-24] 다음 글의 내용과 가장 거리가 먼 것을 고르시오.

① Bachelard described locations in the house as places of

22. By the late eighteenth century,

the discipline of

natural

history

was

dominated

by

so-called

parson-naturalists―vicars, parsons, abbots, deacons, and

intimacy and memory.

② Bachelard placed emphasis on the inside of the house with

a sense of intimacy.

③ Bachelard examined the home as the manifestation of the

monks who cultivated their gardens and collected plant

soul through the poetic image.

and animal specimens to service the wonders of divine

Creation, but generally veered away from questioning

its fundamental assumptions. The result was a peculiar

distortion

of

the

field. Even

as

taxonomy―the

classification of plant and animal species―flourished,

inquiries into the origin of living beings were relegated

to the forbidden sidelines. Natural history devolved into

the study of nature without history. It was this static

view of nature that Darwin found troubling. A natural

historian should be able to describe the state of

the

natural world in terms of causes and effects, Darwin

reasoned, just as a physicist might describe the motion

④ Bachelard suggested that one should transcend mere
description in order to grasp the essential qualities of
space.

⑤ Bachelard suggested that poetic spaces of the house are
dependant on our ability to observe and examine them
objectively.

of a ball in the air. The essence of Darwin’s disruptive

24. The Swiss pastor Johann Casper Lavater wrote

genius was his ability to think about nature not as fact

confidently that

the chin signifies strength in a man.

but as process, as progression, as history.

① Parson-naturalists identified and classified plants and

animals.

② Parson-naturalists had a static view of nature in

describing nature.

③ Parson-naturalists fiercely investigated the origin of

living beings.

④ Parson-naturalists celebrated the immense diversity of

He claimed that an angular or receding chin is seldom

found in “discreet, well disposed,

firm men.” He also

asserted that horizontal eyebrows that are “rich and

clear always convey understanding, coldness of heart,

and

the

capacity

to

frame

plans.” Perhaps

not

surprisingly,

he

thought

that

European

facial

physiognomy was superior

to others.

In a curious

connection, Fitz Roy,

the commander of

the Beagle,

living beings created by an omnipotent God.

was a Lavater fan. The Beagle is the ship that took

⑤ Darwin believed that a natural historian should ask how
nature has progressed in terms of causes and effects.

Darwin around the world to gather evidence from

which he

later developed his

theory of

evolution.

23. The French philosopher Gaston Bachelard once

wrote an analysis of what he called the poetics of

space. The inside of a house, he said, acquires a sense

Darwin wrote in his biography that the captain doubted

that anyone with Darwin’s nose had “sufficient energy

and determination for the voyage.” Of course, this was

the nose that led Darwin through 5 years of arduous

travel that inspired his theory of evolution.

① Lavater linked an individual’s appearance to racial

of intimacy, secrecy, security, real or imagined, because

stereotyping.

of the experiences that come to seem appropriate for it.

② Lavater suggested that men with horizontal eyebrows are

The objective space of a house―its corners, corridors,

likely to be rational rather than emotional.

cellar, rooms―is far less important than what poetically

③ Lavater suggested that discreet, well disposed, and firm

it is endowed with, which is usually a quality with an

imaginative or figurative value we can name and feel;

thus

a house may be haunted,

or homelike,

or

prisonlike, or magical. So space acquires emotional and

even rational sense through a kind of poetic process,

whereby the vacant or anonymous reaches of distance

are converted into meaning for us here. [3점]

men are likely to have an angular chin.

④ Lavater confidently wrote about the relationship between
an individual’s outward appearance and inner character.

⑤ The captain of the Beagle doubted that Darwin had

enough determination for the arduous voyage.

영 어                                        

6

25. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?

① Real-world arguments seldom prove anything.

In the twenty-first century, as debates still rage over

② The argument works when you effectively weaken the

the risks and benefits of DDT as an antimalarial agent;

resistance of those who oppose you.

as calls for environmental

justice are heard in cities

③ The writer should have to make clear first an ethical

worldwide; as populations of marine organisms decline,

fisheries collapse, and toxic waste washes up on our

shores, Rachel Carson’s work

appears

remarkably

relevant and even prescient. Yet, Carson did not set out

to be

an “environmentalist”

or

an “environmental

writer” in the modern sense. Silent Spring, with its

detailed documentation of the dangers of pesticides and

explicit warnings against their indiscriminate use, was

in many ways a departure from the genre of writing

Carson knew and loved best. Carson was first and

foremost

a

nature writer,

someone with

an

extraordinary gift

for

translation and an ability to

evoke in rich detail the fluid boundaries, the tastes and

sounds,

the pains and pleasures, of

the world as

experienced by nonhuman forms of life.

① the use and abuse of natural resources

② Rachel Carson as a nature writer breaking new ground

③ the fame of Rachel Carson in the twenty-first century

④ the emergence of environmental writing as a new literary

genre

⑤ a widening gap between environmentalist justice and

realities

implication embedded within the argument.

④ In order for the argument to work, it is necessary for
writer and audience to share the same underlying
assumption.

⑤ A key difference between formal logic and real-world
arguments is that real world arguments are not grounded
in abstract statements.

27. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장

적절한 곳은? [3점]

This of course does not mean that they are ‘innate’ and

develop autonomously; they may depend on experiences

common to all humans.

Certain aspects of morality can be safely ascribed to

pan-cultural psychological characteristics that are the

product of natural selection. ( ① ) Most obvious

here are aspects of

the relationships between parents

26. “Marine Parks” 논쟁을 통해 화자가 주장하는 것으로

and

their

children

and

between others who

see

가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

themselves as related. ( ② ) It is not only ‘natural’

The public should not support marine parks because

for parents to love their children and children their

they stressfully separate dolphins and orcas from their

parents, but

it

is considered morally right

that

they

natural habitats. On the face of it, this is a plausible

should do so. ( ③ ) Prosociality between parents

argument. But the argument is persuasive only if the

and their offspring is ubiquitous among mammals.

audience agrees with the writer’s assumption that it is

(

④

) Since natural selection acts to promote the

wrong to separate wild animals from their natural

survival of genes, this can reasonably be ascribed to

habitats. What if you believed that confinement of wild

natural selection,

for the child shares half

its (rare)

animals is not always harmful or stressful

to the

genes with each parent.

( ⑤ ) Theory predicts

animals, that the knowledge derived from the capture

that prosociality with more distantly related individuals

of wild animals enables humans to preserve the natural

would

be

reduced

according

to

the

degree

of

environment for these animals, and that the benefits to

relatedness (i.e., the proportion of their genes that they

be gained from the captivity of a small number of wild

share); this is confirmed by data on both human and

animals outweigh the animals’

loss of freedom? If this

non-human species.

were the case, you might believe that marine parks

have positive consequences so long as they strive to

provide

humane

conditions

for

the

animals, with

minimal stress. If these were your beliefs, the argument

wouldn’t work for you because you would reject

the

underlying assumption.

영 어                                        

7

[28-29] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

[30-31] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

For modern

listeners, Debussy

practically

defines

The naming of places is both a necessary means of

French music, by which I mean that

the essential

recognition and communication but also a fundamental

qualities of his music (not only his sensuous delicacy

means of

laying claim to territory. The process of

but

also

his

aversion

to

the

harmonic

behavior

naming is more than a value-free description of a point

characteristic of late-nineteenth-century German music,

in space,

a means of expressing and

a dense chromatic motion that

tends to constantly,

fostering senses

of place

and linking these with

restlessly build to orgiastic climaxes, as in Wagner and

selected aspects of the past. Using the example of rural

Strauss) have come to be seen as essentially “French”

Northern

Ireland, Reid

examines

the

relationships

qualities. Walsh makes clear, however,

that Debussy,

between identity and memory through the naming of

far

from simply

amplifying

or

exemplifying

the

local places. She acknowledges that naming can be part

dominant tendencies of his musical milieu, consciously

of broader processes of inclusion and exclusion when

and stubbornly swam against

the current, especially

linked to particular historical narratives in a divided or

when it came to the heavy influence of German music

unagreed society. While local names may be indicative

on French composers. Wagner was the unavoidable

of diverse cultural

influences, they can also be subject

presence in late-nineteenth-century Paris, but Debussy

to

interpretations

that

reject

pluralist

notions

of

traced the blame for that

influence further back,

to

consociation in favour of singular ethnic figuring of

Gluck. Debussy was quietly radical

in his preference

space and place. Clearly, this does occur in Northern

for Rameau’s “delicate and charming tenderness” over

Ireland where the material marking of placenames in

what he perceived as the Germanic “affectation of

the actual

landscape can be part of a broader claim to

profundity or the need to double underline everything.”

ethnic

territoriality. But

in

her

analysis

of

the

28. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① Further Back to Gluck: Root of Debussy’s Music

② A Wizardly Gift: To Be Both French and German

③ What Makes Debussy’s Music Fundamentally French

④ Rediscovering an Unsung Hero in the History of Music
⑤ Debussy’s Alchemy: Textualizing Global Conflicts into

Music

29. 밑줄 친 “swam against the current”의 의미로 가장

적절한 것은?

① not to cater to the taste of his German audiences

② to control his own personal preferences for French music

③ to withdraw from the world and sink into the inner world

of his art

④ not to imitate the formal

logic and dense textures of

German music

⑤ to curb the contemporary musical tendencies defined by

delicacy and charm

Townlands Campaign in Northern Ireland, Reid shows,

too,

that

the marking of

local place remains of such

fundamental

importance

that

the

process

and

its

associated practices may themselves encourage divided

peoples

to join together

in order

to protect

and

perpetuate their named localities.

30. 윗글의 내용과 가장 가까운 것은? [3점]

① Placenames are endowed with various meanings that are

self-evident.

② The naming of a place cannot be understood as a

deliberate act of collective commemoration.

③ The process of naming a place is associated with how

the past is identified and constructed.

④ The named locality of Northern Ireland has withered as

the call for ethnic singularity mounts.

⑤ The consideration of singular ethnic figuring of place is
more important than that of diverse cultural influences.

31. 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① is

④ where

② being

⑤ of which

③ which

영 어                                        

8

[32-33] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

[34-35] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

Paul Rubin has written a provocative book arguing that

Pidgins and creoles are the outcome of

the need of

the freedom to leave one group and join another, and

people not sharing a language to communicate but differ

thus avoid ① coercion by dominants,

is a deep part of

from national and international

languages in that a

our evolved natures as humans. Rubin argues that our

pidgin does not begin as an already existing language

profound sense of individuality, which has survived in

or dialect selected to serve this purpose;

it is rather a

tandem with our profound social natures, was a kind of

particular combination of

two languages. According to

ultimate veto

over both dominant

and collectivist

Loreto Todd, a pidgin is a

language which

excess. Exit

freedom had the

effect

of

imposing

arises to fulfill certain restricted communication needs

② priority on dominant

individuals in the group:

if a

among people who have no common language.

In the

few powerful

individuals got too powerful, they risked

initial stages of contact

the use of a pidgin is often

loss of members, and thus loss of some of

the net

limited to transactions where a detailed exchange of

advantage of

living in groups. ③ Likewise, even the

ideas is not required and where a small vocabulary,

majority in any group had to keep a keen eye on

drawn almost exclusively from one language, suffices.

majoritarian excess. Justice is what happens when our

Also, the syntactic structure of the pidgin is much less

deepest social axioms―which themselves contain an

complex than the structures of the languages in contact,

embedded

core

of

justice―are

given ④ efficient

and though many pidgin features clearly reflect usages

expression. The key to these social axioms is that they

in the contact

languages, others are unique to the

are

the

evolved

product

of ⑤ reciprocal

social

pidgin. A creole arises when a pidgin becomes the

exchanges. That

is,

the small groups in which we

mother

tongue of a speech community. The simple

evolved contained an important element of freedom―the

structure that characterized the pidgin is carried over

freedom to

enter

into mutually

beneficial

social

into the creole but since a creole, as a mother tongue,

interactions, the freedom to decline to do so, and the

must be capable of expressing the whole range of

freedom to leave the group and go join another. Laws

human

experience,

the

lexicon

is

expanded

and

enacted or developed without

these

complementary

frequently a more elaborate syntactic system evolves.

forces in play will themselves tend to be unjust.

32. 밑줄 친 ① ∼ ⑤ 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하

34. 윗글의 내용과 가장 가까운 것은? [3점]

지 않는 것은? [3점]

33. 윗글 다음에 이어질 문장으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① As such, laws should identify some of their most basic
rules in moral and ethical terms, because that is exactly
what they are for.

probabilities meshes

② The idea that some behaviors are heritable as an array
of
nicely with what
evolutionary theory has been teaching us about human
behaviour.

quite

③ If you want to know what justice is, look at it as would
a “good man,” someone who is not interested in the
outcome of laws but recognizes that one day he may be
subject to what the laws dictate.

④ Thus, a dictator, for example, is inclined to write laws
that are not just, both because the dictator is unlikely to
become an enforcement object of his own laws and
because he may have the power to limit his subjects’ exit.

① A creole usually has simpler structures than a pidgin.

② The vocabulary of a pidgin is largely from two languages

in contact.

③ A pidgin can be considered one of the pre-existing

languages in contact.

④ A pidgin has its unique features other than the ones

reflecting the usages in the contact languages.

⑤ A pidgin develops as a way to facilitate communication
among the groups who used to speak a common language.

35. 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은?

① poetic

② native

③ complicated

④ marginal

⑤ rhetorical

⑤ We are not

fundamentally free;

laws have become
powerful because they can keep us from exercising our
freedom to exit the group.

영 어                                        

[36-37] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

[38-39] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

One of the strategic principles for success in the stock

It is possible for a product to become

9

.

market is to refrain from having knee-jerk reactions to

When a product

is so new, so innovative, or so well

possibly deceptive fluctuations in the market’s or a

marketed that

it dominates the marketplace and the

particular stock’s performance. Before reinvesting in a

mindset of the consumer, it can be easy to associate the

rapidly falling stock, analysts and investors will often

product’s brand name with the product

itself. When a

wait

for the passing of one or more small upward

type of product is nearly universally known or referred

bumps, referred to as “dead cat bounces.” The term

to by the brand name of one version of the product, the

reflects the somewhat crude idea that even a dead cat

brand name becomes a victim of “genericism.” Aspirin

will bounce if it falls from a great height. Upticks in a

(acetylsalicylic acid),

the escalator (moving stairs), and

plummeting stock can be caused by short selling,

the pogo stick (hopping toy) are all former brand names

triggered sell-offs, or overly optimistic reactions to

whose success and popularity led to such general and

changes made by the company, such as replacing an

widespread use of the names that the inventors or parent

unpopular CEO. Such a small, unimpressive rise is

companies were unable

to maintain their

trademark

usually followed by another drop-off that surpasses the

protections and even lost

their competitive advantage

previous low. While almost exclusively related to the

against similar products described with the term that had

stock market,

the term has found occasional use in

once been a definitive brand name. All

it takes is one

describing other areas of misleading improvement. Poll

court ruling for a term that has shifted away from its

numbers for a candidate losing ground near an election

identity as a trusted brand name to become forever

sometimes make a brief,

surge. In sports,

identified as a generic product. When this happens, a

losing teams that make midseason coaching changes

company is likely to lose a profitable beachhead within

sometimes experience a mild surge of energy that

the consumer consciousness. The loss of revenue due to

translates to one or more wins before the team reverts

a shift

to genericism is

compounded by the

large

to form.

36. 윗글의 내용과 가장 거리가 먼 것은? [3점]

① A “dead cat bounce” can be observed in sports and

politics.

amounts of money companies spend in an attempt

to

keep it

from happening. Despite spending millions of

dollars

in legal and public

relations

campaigns,

the

company Kimberly-Clark has been fighting an uphill

battle to keep people from referring to all

forms of

tissues as Kleenex.

② A “dead cat bounce” refers to a small surge of a stock

after a rapid decline.

38. 윗글의 내용과 가장 거리가 먼 것은?

③ Investors usually practice patience before reinvesting

① Genericism is a by-product of a company’s successful

when a “dead cat bounce” occurs.

marketing of a product.

④ Replacing the unpopular CEO of a company can be a cause

② Kimberly-Clark doesn’t want people to refer to all forms

of a “dead cat bounce” in the stock market.

⑤ A fall of the stock can be expected after a “dead cat
bounce,” but it typically does not exceed the previous low
point.

37. 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① sharp

② illusory

③ expected

④ impressive

⑤ inexplicable

of tissues as Kleenex.

③ Aspirin and the escalator are often considered brand
names rather than the names of products nowadays.

④ Companies are usually unable to protect their trademarks

when they become a generic term for a product.

⑤ Companies often spend a lot of money to prevent their
trademarks from becoming a generic term for a product.

39. 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① a victim of its own success

② popular regardless of its quality

③ unpopular because of its brand name

④ a big success regardless of marketing strategies

⑤ nothing but a failure due to marketing strategies

영 어                                        

10

[40-41] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

Critics drawn to Monet in the 1880s used two words

in particular to ① characterize what set him apart from

other

painters,

either

academic

or

experimental.

Instantanéité (of

the

instant,

the moment)

and

enveloppe (envelope or covering) defined Monet by his

ability to make ② accessible

for

contemplation the

overall spectral qualities bathing a scene usually only

for very brief periods of time. Octave Mirbeau’s catalog

essay for Monet’s 1889 exhibition at the Georges Petit

gallery defined instantanéité as a method for identifying

the light scales that ③ allowed one to make sense of a

scene. The values that constituted the scale of a scene

were seeded here and there. They changed so ④ rarely

that one was seldom aware of the role they played in

determining one’s emotional

reaction. Monet’s careful

observation and selection allowed him to ⑤ fix the

values he found “in their exact

form” so that an

otherwise fleeting design might become available to all

for observation. Monet understood, Mirbeau assured his

readers, that in order to arrive at an interpretation of

nature that was at once exact and emotionally moving,

one had to pierce the passing effects of time and make

visible the movement of harmonic values.

40. 밑줄 친 ① ∼ ⑤ 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하

지 않는 것은? [3점]

41. 밑줄 친 “exact and emotionally moving”의 의미로 가

장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① creating peace in the absence of conflict

② too complex to be comprehended through any artistic skills

③ of utmost importance to artists as a means of taming their

emotional tides

④ assessing a quality that is mysterious but can be captured

by artistic perception

⑤ confronting nature’s capricious actions with the conviction
that artists are after all incapable of intelligent replies to
them


===== 67befee5-2022_____________A_____________.pdf =====
한양대학교 2022학년도 편입학전형 문제지

영

어

인문

문제 유형

A

1. 문제지 상단의 문제 유형을 표시하시오.

① Ⓐ

② Ⓑ

2. 밑줄 친 부분에 들어갈 말로 어법상 가장 적절한 것은?
____________ King Arthur chose that particular place to
build a capital is a mystery.

① Why

② What

③ Where

④ Whatever

⑤ The ways in which

3. 밑줄 친 부분 중 어법 상 틀린 것은?

Clara and Johannes Brahms first crossed orbits in 1853,
①when her beloved husband―the
celebrated composer
Robert Schumann―encountered in the ②twenty-years-old
Brahms a talent so uncommon and promising that he
immediately ③set about bringing the music world’s ④awed
attention to it, writing impassioned letters to all the leading
journals and ⑤auguring the young musician’s future fame.

4. 밑줄 친 단어의 뜻과 가장 가까운 것은?

Colonialism began as a mercantilist
enterprise, with
companies establishing trading posts along the ocean
coastlines in the warm waters of the tropics. They used
whichever medium of exchange was most expedient for
trade.

① exotic

② tenuous

③ opportune

④ ingenuous

⑤ meretricious

[5-18] 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

critics’

5. While most
____________,
columnist Tony Tanner, who called it
triumph.

a highly positive

reaction to

reaction came

the book was
from
a rhetorical

① tepid

② immediate

③ laudatory

④ enthusiastic

⑤ spontaneous

6. Victim-blaming can apply to cases of rape and sexual
assault, but also to more ____________ crimes,
like a
person who gets pickpocketed and is then chided for his
decision to carry his wallet in his back pocket.

① tedious

④ financial

② vicious

③ mundane

⑤ sophisticated

a

of

critique

7. E. H. Carr has said that anarchism in the last century
was
social
society, not
reconstruction. The virtues of being without government
were
emerging
as
for anarchists to
industrial order, and it was difficult
think about an anarchic society as having an ongoing
life of its own.

____________

conceived

plan for

the

to

a

① tributes

② collateral

③ correctives

④ semblances

⑤ preliminaries

8. In much utopian writing, there’s an understanding that
any ideal society would inevitably be complicated by the
people living in it; that the boundary between utopia and
dystopia is often ____________ and always intensely
subjective: that one person’s idea of paradise is another’s
idea of hell.

① rigid

④ porous

② palpable

⑤ legitimate

③ evident

9. We need to develop a better descriptive vocabulary for
lying, a ____________, a way to distinguish intentional lies
from unintentional ones, and a way to distinguish the lies
that the liar himself believes in―a way to signal those
lies that could be more accurately described as dreams.

① sign

② parameter

③ taxonomy

④ trajectory

⑤ configuration

10. When Spanx founder Sara Blakely had the idea for
footless pantyhose, she believed in her ability to make the
idea a reality, but she was full of doubt about her current
tools. Her day job was selling fax machines door-to-door,
and she was aware that she didn’t know anything about
fashion, retail, or manufacturing. When she was designing
the prototype, she spent a week driving around to hosiery
mills to ask them for help. When she couldn’t afford a
law firm to apply for a patent, she read a book on the
the application herself. Her doubt
topic and filled out
wasn’t
could
confident
she was
overcome the challenges in front of her. Her confidence
wasn’t in her existing knowledge―it was in her capacity
to learn. [3점]

____________;

she

① singular

④ miniscule

② habitual

③ accidental

⑤ debilitating

영 어                                        

2

in Egyptian

extra meaning

14. Some scholars think the scaly Leviathan may have
been a crocodile, the lord of the Nile, already invested
with
the
Leviathan’s multiple heads, fire-breathing flashing eyes,
stony heart, ability to make the sea boil, and other
_____________________ suggest that it is a mythological
creature reprising the old battle of creation between sea
and dry land.

lore,

but

① dominant genes

② endangered traits

③ ferocious behaviors

④ biological improbables

⑤ mundane characteristics

it

it

the

romantic

15. The apparent
increase in the romance’s popularity
may well be attributed to women’s changing beliefs and
is conceivable that
needs. However,
is equally a
factors too, because the romance’s
function of other
recent success also coincides with important changes in
book production, distribution, and marketing techniques.
In fact,
it may be true that Harlequin Enterprises can
sell 168 million romances not because women suddenly
have a greater need for
fantasy but
because the corporation has learned to address and
overcome
in the production and
distribution of books for a mass audience. If it can be
shown that
romance sales have been increased by
practices newly adopted within the publishing industry,
then we must entertain the alternate possibility that the
the female audience for this fiction
apparent need of
may have been _____________________________________.
If so,
the romance may
constitute evidence for the effectiveness of commodity
packaging and advertising and not for actual changes in
readers’ beliefs or in the surrounding culture.

the astonishing success of

recurring problems

① generated or augmented artificially

② consequent to increased female literacy

③ encouraged greatly by women’s liberation

④ proof of female discontent in the postwar period

⑤ an outgrowth of more authorial control over works

of

contracts,

boilerplate

documents

11. Much legal work involves the preparation and filing of
routine
divorce
proceedings, property conveyancing, personal injuries claims,
court summonses, and so on. Automated document assembly
systems have been developed that can generate these
documents with ease. Various
in
providing these documents directly to the consumer, via
online platforms, thereby cutting out the need to rely on a
professional consultation with a lawyer. Related to this, the
process of document review, long the __________ of a young
lawyer’s life due to its mind-numbing tediousness, is being
routinely automated at many firms, with companies like
Deloitte offering it as a key service to their clients. [3점]

companies

specialize

① bane

④ stigma

② norm

⑤ mirage

③ zenith

12. According to one study, we talk to ourselves at a
rate equivalent to speaking 4,000 words per minute (by
the American president’s State of
way of comparison,
the Union address, which usually runs to about 6,000
words,
lasts more than an hour). No wonder, then, that
listening to it can be exhausting, whether it takes the
form of a rambling soliloquy, or a compulsive rehashing
of events, a free-associative pinballing from one thought
to another or a furious internal dialogue. But
if such
noise can be paralyzing,
it can also be self-sabotaging.
What we experience on the inside can __________ almost
everything else if we let it. A study published in 2010, for
instance, shows that inner experiences consistently dwarf
outer ones. [3점]

① put off

④ bring up

② get over

⑤ make up

③ blot out

studying Earth’s

13. Science is not really about “right,” “wrong,” “true” or
“false.” My work
interior, where
observations are always incomplete and often not very
accurate, has led me to the idea that theories should be
evaluated as more or less useful within a certain context.
I
find this avoids much confusion about what science
provides. For example, Isaac Newton’s theory of gravity
was superseded by Albert Einstein’s, but
that did not
make Newton’s theory “wrong” or make Einstein’s “right.”
in many
Newton’s
contexts. Einstein’s theory is useful
in a much broader
range of them: it can do a better job of explaining black
If someday a better idea than Einstein’s general
holes.
theory of
relativity comes along, or observations are
found that are inconsistent with that theory, then Einstein
will not have been ______________ either.

extremely useful

theory is

still

① right

④ tenable

② wrong

③ useful

⑤ self-defeating

3

18. Highly specialized health care professionals have
developed their own versions of the “if all you have is a
hammer, everything looks like a nail” problem. Interventional
cardiologists have gotten so used to treating chest pain with
stents―metal tubes that pry open blood vessels―that they
do so reflexively even in cases where voluminous research
has proven that
they are inappropriate or dangerous. A
recent study found that cardiac patients are actually less
likely to die if
they were admitted during a national
cardiology meeting, when thousands of cardiologists were
away;
could be
because ________________________________________________.

suggested that

researchers

the

it

① specialists take reasonable courses of action

② cardiologists received adequate training in treating

chest pain

③ generalists are more skilled at basic procedures than

specialists

④ common treatments of dubious effect were less likely

to be performed

⑤ experience confirms the old saying that absence makes

the heart grow fonder

영 어                                        

16. The millions of Irish girls and women who emigrated
to North America in the 19th and early 20th centuries
tend to be remembered,
if at all, as domestic servants,
cooks, wives and mothers. A reputation for diligence and
rectitude cast them as the unsung heroes of a diaspora
that went on to conquer US business and politics. But it
turns out there is an untold chapter in the Irish emigrant
experience, because many girls and women were in fact
sex workers, thieves and drunkards, even killers, and they
filled the prisons of Boston, New York and Toronto.
Ireland and Irish America have long preferred to dwell on
diaspora successes, such as John F Kennedy’s rise to the
White House, and Joe Biden’s election win has enhanced
that narrative. Those emigrants who found no American
dream, only a nightmare,
largely vanished from memory
in _________________.

① national identity

② cultural vacancy

③ atavistic violence

④ collective amnesia

⑤ trauma victimhood

17. Jeremy Bentham was a fierce critic of
the legal
establishment, but he was scarcely more sympathetic to
radical and revolutionary movements which were
the
erupting elsewhere. Confronted by the political claims of
the French and American revolutionaries, Bentham was
scornful. “Natural rights is simple nonsense,” he declared,
rhetorical nonsense;
“natural and imprescriptible rights,
nonsense upon stilts.” When radical philosophers such as
Thomas Paine appealed to such ideas, they were making
the identical mistake that monarchs or religious leaders
made when they claimed some divine or magical sanction
for their actions: _________________________________. [3점]

① they were exercising power with revolutionary zeal

② they were prioritizing public utility over other social

needs

③ they were forgoing immediate benefits for long-term

payoffs

④ they were drawing upon short-lived populist sentiment

for support

⑤ they were talking about something which had no

tangible existence

영 어                                        

4

19. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

[21-22] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

and

itself well

increasingly worked

The mid-nineteenth century had seen the introduction
of the first haute couture salons, elite institutions that
only very rarely sold pret-a-porter (ready-to-wear)
garments. The twentieth century introduced a change,
and much stiffer competition, with designers like Coco
Chanel making pret-a-porter available directly from
their salons. The type of clothing produced by Chanel
lent
to this approach, being significantly
simpler, freer, and more suited to the postwar woman
independent
who
lifestyle. Her innovative use of jersey (previously used
almost exclusively for menswear, particularly underwear)
was an inspired move
that promoted easy-to-wear
garments and an emphasis on sportswear for women.
The majority of her clothing was devoid of fuss, with
straight simple lines and a classic elegance that did not
require the use of restrictive corsetry. This ability to
____________________ is a philosophy carried on by
twenty-first century designers, and the presence and
celebrity of Chanel herself―perhaps the first designer to
attain such a status in the world―has also had a
profound influence on the designers and fashion houses
of today.

led

an

21. 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① present a signature style to outlive rapidly changing

trends

② make thrifty use of commonplace fabrics in high-end

couture

③ beat competition by exploiting the designer’s name

recognition

④ make canny use of new media to market exclusive

must-have items

⑤ marry high-end designer wear with the demands of

contemporary life

22. 밑줄 친 “introduced”의 뜻과 가장 가까운 것은?

① evaded

② extended

③ heralded

④ suspended

⑤ eliminated

Flowers are of course deployed to mean erotic, romantic,
things, as garlands draped
ceremonial, and spiritual
across altars and hung around the necks of winning
racehorses, and all the rest.

these complex
(A) The visible flower is a marker of
systems, and some of the beauty attributed to the flower
as an autonomous object may really be about the flower
as a part of a larger whole.

to,

in what
and growth incarnate,

it references or
(B) That beauty lies in part
connects
the
as
annunciation of the fruit to follow. A flower is a node
interconnections
on a network of botanical systems of
and regeneration.

life

as

(C) But before a flower is used to do something else, to
it is in itself an occasion for
honor a human occasion,
attention. We say that flowers are beautiful, but what
we mean by the beauty of a flower is something more
than appearance, which is why real flowers are so much
more beautiful than artificial flowers.

① (A) - (B) - (C)

③ (B) - (C) - (A)

⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

② (B) - (A) - (C)

④ (C) - (A) - (B)

20. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은?

engineer’s

From an

perspective,

How is something as complex and vital as the head so
evolvable?
great
evolvability seems counterintuitive. Any complex feature
that
to
is indispensable for survival should be difficult
change via an agentless process such as natural selection.
For one, it seems reasonable to expect that complex, highly
intricate objects will function less well if they are modified,
because even small alterations are likely to have potentially
(A)____________ consequences. A second problem is that
natural selection should act strongly to (B)____________ any
modifications to complex structures like heads that reduce
functionality. Heads perform so many vital tasks―such as
breathing, smelling, swallowing, seeing, and hearing―that
mutations which lead to even a slight impairment of any
likely cause a decrease in fitness. Thus one
function will
might
and
conservative.

highly constrained

expect

heads

be

to

(A)

① negligible
② restrictive
③ deleterious
④ mysterious
⑤ catastrophic

(B)
taper off
speed up
winnow out
knock in
usher in

 
영 어                                        

5

[23-25] 다음 글의 내용과 거리가 가장 먼 것을 고르시오.

① Puritans thought that everyone had to read the bible

23. Happiness is sometimes seen as a state of mind. But
‘Well-being’, as we
this is not how Aristotle regards it.
usually translate his term for happiness,
is what we
might call a state of soul, which for him involves not
just an interior condition of being, but a disposition to
behave in certain ways. As Ludwig Wittgenstein once
remarked, the best image of the soul is the body. If you
want to observe someone’s ‘spirit’, look at what they do.
Happiness for Aristotle is attained by virtue, and virtue
is above all a social practice rather than an attitude of
mind. Happiness is part of a practical way of life, not
some private inner contentment. On this theory, you
could look at someone’s conduct over a period of time
and exclaim ‘He’s happy!’ as you could not on a more
dualistic model of human beings. And he would not
have to be beaming or cavorting about either. [3점]

① Aristotle claimed that a person could become happy

by being virtuous.

② Aristotle maintained that behavior or conduct accurately

expressed a person’s spirit.

③ Aristotle thought that a person’s happiness could be

assessed by an observer.

④ Aristotle

believed

that

optimistic

thinking was

indispensable for happiness.

⑤ Aristotle’s understanding of

the soul-body relation

had much in common with that of Wittgenstein.

a

as

as

soon

divine

reading

through

teachers

that
revelation

each individual had to
24. The Puritan belief
encounter
the
scriptures had far-reaching implications. If everyone was
expected to read the Bible, everyone had to be literate.
Public schoolhouses, therefore, were built and staffed by
salaried
new town was
established. While other
regions in America had no
school systems of any kind in the mid-seventeenth
the rich―New
century―education was a privilege of
England required all children to be sent to school under
law. While few Englishmen could read or
penalty of
write in 1660,
two-thirds of Massachusetts men and
more than a third of women could sign their own
names. And while basic education was universal, those
with higher education were accorded the sort of respect
and deference other societies reserved for the highborn.
leading
Early New England had an elite, a group of
families who intermarried and came to dominate political
and religious affairs, but it was an elite based not on
wealth but education.

for himself or herself.

② Social status in Puritan New England was primarily

determined by affluence.

③ Early colonists in New England took their educational

institutions and educators seriously.

④ Not sending children to school

in colonial New

England could result in legal punishment.

⑤ In 1660, men in Massachusetts were more likely to

be literate than their English counterparts.

25. By the fifteenth century, coffee was being cultivated

in East Africa and traded across the Arabian peninsula.
Initially the new drink was regarded as an aid to

concentration and used by Sufis in Yemen to keep them
observances.
from dozing off during their

religious

Within a century, coffeehouses had sprung up in cities
In 1570 there were more than
across the Arab world.
six hundred in Constantinople alone, and they spread

north and west with the Ottoman Empire. These new
public spaces were hotbeds of news and gossip, as well

places

as
Coffeehouses were

to gather

for

performances

comparatively

liberal

and games.
institutions

where the conversation often turned to politics, and at
various times governmental and clerical powers-that-be
attempted to close them down, but never for long or

with much success. A vat of coffee was put on trial
in
Mecca in 1511 for its dangerously intoxicating effects;

however, its conviction, and subsequent banishment, was
quickly overturned by the sultan of Cairo. As coffee’s

defenders rightly pointed out, the beverage is nowhere
mentioned in the Koran.

① Coffeehouses

served
intellectual exchange.

as

spaces

for

cultural

and

② Several centuries ago, religious practitioners imbibed

coffee to stay alert.

③ The Koran does not explicitly ban,

let alone refer to,

coffee consumption.

④ Political and religious leaders shut down coffeehouses

for protracted periods.

⑤ The

expansion

of

the Ottoman Empire

helped

propagate coffeehouse culture.

영 어                                        

6

[26-27] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

27. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

imaginations. Technology innovations

Half a century ago, NASA’s moon shot

landed Neil
Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin on the moon and set fire to
from the
our
program went on to seed entire industries,
including
microelectronics, software, and communications, which
now form the backbone of our digital century. Another
innovation was that NASA built and maintained a
physical twin of the space-craft on the ground so that it
could troubleshoot problems without risk to the mission.
troubled Apollo 13
This proved crucial during the
mission and helped NASA bring the astronauts home
safely. This basic concept has now evolved into the use
twins, but built and
of digital
realm.
than physical
maintained in the digital
Fundamentally, a DT is a dynamic model of a physical
system that enables fast and creative experimentation at
very low cost and risk.

twins, or DTs―still
rather

DTs have already been used in specialized, complex
applications like observing and modeling the operation of
an aircraft engine or manufacturing equipment. These
initial DT deployments were tactical, mainly for data
life cycle management. But
visualization and product
now, thanks to a confluence of technological advances,
DTs are at an intriguing inflection point―transitioning
from that
domain to becoming
tactical
strategic tools with diverse applications. Leaders now
have inspiring opportunities: achieving business success
while helping our planet and humanity. They can use
DTs to strategize new cross-disciplinary opportunities
and drive smart digital transformation. And they can use
sustainability goals and
DTs
to achieve aggressive
enhance the health and safety of
their employees and
communities.

specialized,

26. 윗글 다음에 이어질 내용으로 가장 거리가 먼 것은? [3점]

① DTs can be invaluable in reducing energy consumption
and supporting the more efficient development of green
alternatives.

② In the near future, DTs can reproduce human emotions,
interactions in

making it possible to simulate social
digital space.

③ The

cross-disciplinary

that DTs
ensure help organizations have the right mix of
technological expertise and domain knowledge.

opportunities

④ DTs

can improve workplace

safety by accurately
modelling and predicting the spread of viral pathogens in
controlled workplace environments.

⑤ Much current innovation focuses on adding intelligence
to things, which enables DTs to support the innovation
necessary for a digital transformation to smart systems.

① The Past and Future of Digital Twins

② Optimal Combinations of Physics and AI

③ Digital Twins, an Aerospace Technology

④ How DTs Can Restrict Strategic Priorities

⑤ Virtual Models of Real-World Objects for Health and

Safety

[28-29] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

to

has

instead

become

inequality

As meritocracy has tightened its hold on our public
life what began as a principle that seemed to offer an
alternative
a
justification for inequality. What’s more, meritocracy
has become a kind of (A)hereditary system, much as
aristocracy was. Affluent,
privileged parents have
figured out how to pass their privilege on to their
kids, not by bequeathing them land or estates, as in
aristocratic societies, but instead by equipping them to
compete (B)successfully on standardized tests and to
win admission to highly competitive universities. The
growing awareness of the problems with meritocracy
the
a
in
(C)aggravating divide between winners and losers.
The divide has (D)poisoned our politics and set us
apart. This has partly to do with (E)decreasing income
it has also to do with
and wealth inequality. But
In this way, a
changing attitudes toward success.
seemingly attractive principle―that
are
chances
if
equal,
their winnings―by
implication comes to mean that ____________________.

the winners

decades

deserve

recent

result

direct

of

is

28. 밑줄 친 (A) ∼ (E) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절

하지 않은 것은? [3점]

① (A)

④ (D)

② (B)

⑤ (E)

③ (C)

29. 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① a fully realized meritocracy would lessen pride in

meritocratic achievement

② those who struggle and fall short must deserve

their fate as well

③ the answer

to inequality is

individual mobility

through higher education

④ the so-called meritocratic winners are often highly

competent and yet seem to pay a price for it

⑤ instead of arming people for meritocratic competition,
we should shift toward renewing the dignity of work

영 어                                        

7

[30-31] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

[32-33] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

At

attempts

the beginning of

the twentieth century, scholars
from a wide array of disciplines began to think that
narratives are central to human thinking and motivation.
to understand social movements,
In their
sociologists have begun to think of
the contagion of
narratives as (A)central to social change. For example,
sociologist Francesca Polletta, who studied the sit-in
social movement of the 1960s in which white Americans
participated in protests of discrimination against blacks,
reported that students described the demonstrations as
(B)unplanned like a fever and over and over again,
spontaneous. These demonstrations were often driven by
a particular popular narrative about blacks demanding
lunch counters that were labeled as “white
service at
only,” accompanied by young white (C)supporters who
showed moral outrage at the exclusion of blacks.

The sit-in story emerged from a single story about a
protest in 1960 involving four students from Greensboro
College. The story revolved around polite young black
people who (D)obeyed orders to leave the lunch counter
where blacks were not served. The young people sat
the restaurant
patiently, waiting to be served until
closed, and they returned the next day with more young
people. The story went viral,
through word of mouth
and through news media attention, and the sit-ins
the United States. The
spread throughout much of
story’s spread was not entirely unplanned. Activists tried
to promulgate the story, but
in tight
control of
the social movement, which was largely
(E)viral. The word sit-in, coined in 1960, was a true
epidemic.

they were not

30. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① Who’s Making Sense of Narrative Change

② Why Some Narratives Have Become Obsolete

③ The Centrality of Narratives in Social Movements

④ Unsung Heroes in the History of Social Activism

⑤ Diverse Evidence on the Inflammatory Nature of

Narratives

31. 밑줄 친 (A) ∼ (E) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이
적절하지 않은 것은?

① (A)

④ (D)

② (B)

⑤ (E)

③ (C)

Detractors describe the valuation of Bitcoin as nothing
more than a speculative bubble. Legendary investor
Warren Buffett said, “it’s a gambling device.” Critics
find its story similar to (A)that of
the famous tulip
mania in the Netherlands in the 1630s, when speculators
drove up the price of tulip bulbs to such heights that
one bulb was worth (B)about as much as a house. That
is, Bitcoins
public
excitement.
(C)With Bitcoin to achieve its spectacular
success, people had to become excited enough by the
Bitcoin phenomenon to take action to seek out unusual
exchanges to buy them.

because

today

value

have

of

is

as

has

bubble

example,

advocates,

things. For

the ultimate

For Bitcoin’s

labeling Bitcoin

from public support
gold

fundamentally different
other

a
insult. Bitcoin’s
speculative
supporters often point out that public support for Bitcoin
for
is not
many
held
tremendous value in the public mind for thousands of
years, but the public could just as well have accorded it
little value if (D)people had started using something else
for money. People value gold primarily because they
it is
perceive that other people value gold. In addition,
bubbles can last a long time. Long
pointed out
after
rare and
seventeenth-century tulip mania,
beautiful tulips continued to be highly valued, (E)though
tulip mania
not
continues even today in a diminished form. The same
might happen to Bitcoin.

to such extremes. To some extent,

that

the

32. 밑줄 친 (A) ∼ (E) 중에서 어법상 적절하지 않은

것은? [3점]

① (A)

④ (D)

② (B)

⑤ (E)

③ (C)

33. 윗글의 내용과 일치하는 것은? [3점]

① Tulip mania disappeared a long time ago.

② The value of gold is based on people’s belief

that

other people also value gold.

③ The famous tulip bubble is one reason many people

become Bitcoin enthusiasts.

④ Warren Buffet supports Bitcoin because he can

identify why people believe in its value.

⑤ Critics do not value Bitcoin primarily because its
volatile prices can lead to price fluctuations of many
commodities.

영 어                                        

8

[34-36] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

34. 윗글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

We’re moving from an era of core competencies that

① challenges and risks in the age of AI

differ from industry to industry to an age shaped by

② tech-driven dangers in globalized job markets

data

and

analytics

and

powered

by

algorithms.

③ AI-centered

companies’

superiority over

traditional

Strategies

are

shifting

away

from traditional

firms

differentiation based on cost, quality,

and vertical

expertise

toward advantages

like business network

position,

the accumulation of unique data, and the

deployment of sophisticated analytics―all made possible

by AI. Though it can unleash enormous growth,

the

removal of operating constraints isn’t always a good

④ optimizing company culture by deploying sophisticated

analytics

⑤ implementing new combinations of

technologies and

human skills

thing. _____________________________________ are prone

35. 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

to instability and hard to stop once they’re in motion.

Think of a car without brakes. A digital signal―a viral

meme,

for

instance―can

spread

rapidly

through

networks and can be impossible to halt, even for the

① Frictionless systems

② Outmoded technologies

③ Viral marketing strategies

organization that launched it in the first place or an

④ Democratic decision-making processes

entity that controls the key hubs in a network. If you

⑤ Government intervention and regulations

have a message to send, AI offers a fantastic way to

reach vast numbers of people and personalize that

message for them. But the marketer’s paradise can be a

citizen’s

nightmare. Digital

operating models

can

36. 밑줄 친 “the marketer’s paradise can be a citizen’s

nightmare”가 의미하는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?

aggregate harm along with value. Even when the intent

① Data privacy must be prioritized.

is positive,

the potential downside can be significant.

② Customers may suffer from AI-powered growth.

③ Marketing strategies always need to take consumers’

needs into account.

④ Productivity can be increased by human efforts as

well as AI-enabled systems.

⑤ Advances in AI technology may create more high-skilled

jobs but distort job markets.

Algorithms,

if left unchecked, can exacerbate bias and

misinformation on a massive scale.

Digital scale, scope, and learning create a lot of new

challenges. The institutions designed to keep an eye on

business―regulatory bodies, for example―are struggling

to keep up with all the rapid change. In an AI-driven

world, once an offering’s fit with a market is ensured,

user numbers and revenues can skyrocket. Yet

it’s

increasingly obvious

that unconstrained growth is

dangerous. The potential

for businesses that embrace

digital operating models is huge, but

the capacity to

inflict widespread

harm needs

to

be

explicitly

considered. Navigating these opportunities and threats

will be a real test of leadership for both businesses and

public institutions.

영 어                                        

9

[37-39] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

37. 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

Those of us who still believe in the power of reason

① a language trick

clearly have a considerable problem with post-truth and

② an infinite regress

the ideas and attitudes it is insinuating into our culture.

Just

to complicate matters, however, we have to ask

ourselves if perhaps we have a problem with truth itself

too, in which case the issue becomes far murkier than it

first appears. Truth has been a subject of much debate

amongst practitioners, particularly the issue of what

criteria could guarantee the truth of any proposition. The

concept of

truth had to be based on something itself

known to be true beyond all possible doubt in order to

③ a myth of objectivity

④ a kind of irrational rationality

⑤ a web of philosophical debates

38. 밑줄 친 “obdurate”의 의미로 가장 적절한 것은?

① displaying keen insight

② difficult to understand or solve

provide that guarantee. Some philosophers began to

③ characterized by wiliness and trickery

claim that no such criteria would ever be found,

that

④ resistant to persuasion or softening influences

instead we were trapped in _________________________:

⑤ giving a deceptive impression of easiness or simplicity

whatever it was that guaranteed the concept of

truth

had to be guaranteed by something else in its turn. It

was a process that could never end, meaning that at

best

there were only degrees of

truth. This was the

position of classical skepticism, and it still poses some

of the subject’s ‘most obdurate problems’. Truth, in other

words, was to be treated as a relative rather than an

absolute concept.

39. 밑줄 친 “that”이 의미하는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① Truth is located in human will and intention.

② Certainty of knowledge is an unattainable desire.

③ Post-truth creates a major problem for philosophers.

④ Relativism is an indispensible part of contemporary

Many contemporary philosophers have adopted that

philosophy.

stance

of

relativism,

arguing that

language

is

too

⑤ Language is precise enough to serve as a means of

imprecise to guarantee the truth of anything we say.

communication.

That

is the claim of

followers of deconstruction,

for

whom meaning was to be considered in a constant state

of flux, altering subtly from statement to statement over

time. Meaning never attained ‘full presence’. Such is the

strange ‘being’ of the sign―the combination of word and

concept―half of it always ‘not there’ and the other half

always ‘not that’. Truth is then a variable quality, never

anything fixed;

it keeps shifting around, regardless of

our intentions, and it can never reach the state of being

beyond all possible doubt. We may well want

to be

truthful

in our utterances, but language will undermine

us every time around:

that

is just

the way discourse

works, and we have no choice but

to accommodate

ourselves to that.

영 어                                        

[40-41] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

10

this

Our national reckoning on race has brought

to the
fore a loose but committed assemblage of people given
to the idea that social
justice must be pursued via
attempts to banish from the public sphere, as much as
possible, all opinions that they interpret as insufficiently
opposed to power differentials. Valid intellectual and
artistic endeavor must hold the battle against white
supremacy front and center, white people are to identify
and (A)expunge their complicity in this white supremacy
task can never be
with the
assumption that
completed,
and statements questioning this program
constitute a form of “violence” that merits shaming and
expulsion. Skeptics have labeled this undertaking “cancel
culture” which of late has occasioned a pushback from
its representatives. The goal,
is less to
eliminate all signs of a person’s existence―which tends
to
supplement
critique with punishment of some kind. Thus a group of
linguists in July submitted to the Linguistic Society of
America a petition not only to (C)criticize the linguist
and
they
considered racist and sexist, but to have him stripped of
his Linguistic Society of America fellow status and
(D)removed
listing
linguist consultants available to the media. An indication
of how deeply this frame of mind has penetrated many
of our movers and shakers is that they tend to see this
punishment
as
(E)unjust,
opposed to the novel, censorious addendum that it is.

organization’s website

anyway―than

they suggest,

(B)impractical

self-evidently

psychologist

from the

Steven

Pinker

clause

views

for

be

as

to

40. 밑줄 친 (A) ∼ (E) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절

하지 않은 것은? [3점]

① (A)

④ (D)

② (B)

⑤ (E)

③ (C)

41. 저자의 “cancel culture”에 대한 태도로 가장 적절한

것은? [3점]

① critical

② satirical

③ nostalgic

④ favorable

⑤ indifferent


===== 521dcf37-2017_____________A______.pdf =====
한양대학교 2017학년도 편입학전형 문제지

영

어

문제 유형

A

1. 문제지 상단의 문제 유형을 표시하시오.

[6-10] 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 알맞은 어휘를 고르시오.

6. As in other artistic domains, there were those quick to
recognize and _______ sculptures’ commercial possibilities.
While the magnificent cathedrals of the Middle Ages
contained works by the sculptors of the time, it was the
combined skills of the stonemason and the architect which
were responsible for the structures themselves. In a sense,
the reverse has been true in the digital world. The
development of hardware and software needed to create
and manipulate objects in three-dimensional space has
been driven by the world of commerce.

① extort
③ exploit

② extol
④ extricate

7. Martin Luther King,

(A)

Jr. was one of

the greatest
speechmakers, and at first it might seem obvious why. As
well as being educated and prodigiously talented, the young
. Every syllable of his oratory
reverend left nothing to
was meticulously prepared. By contrast, consider the fate of
those who do not seem to have prepared. Rick Perry, then
the governor of Texas, was once the favorite to be the
Republican presidential nominee for the 2012 election. His
chances ebbed because his performance in debates was
. During one debate, a journalist tweeted, “I think

(B)

Rick Perry just had a stroke.” [3점]

(A)

① risk

② chance

③ speculation

④ coincidence

(B)

raging

excruciating

disappointing

impassioned

① A형

② B형

[2-3] 밑줄 친 부분 중 어법에 맞지 않는 것을 고르시오.

2. To our surprise, Erik Dickinson fell ① short of his

parents’ expectations, ② disappointing them who kept

the faith in their son’s potential for success, when he

③ was proved to be ④ a failure as a statesman.

3. Technology has made ① it necessary to switch to new
forms of labor and modes of productivity. Along with

privatization and deregulation ② instigated neoliberal
policies, this shifting work landscape has ushered people
into more private and isolated spaces. The logic of a free

market as well as mechanisms of power ③ has become
the backbone of corporate decisions. Through the

individualization of labor and the proliferation of precarious
employment, exploitation and inequality become ④ even
greater.

[4-5] 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 알맞은 표현을 고르시오.

4. Not until newly developed germfree surgery was
introduced in the nineteenth century
ligatures
extensively.

① surgeons used

② did surgeons use

③ when surgeons used

④ was used by surgeons

5. Consumers may choose to purchase fruit, vegetables,
meat, and other products from local markets for a range
of reasons. They may want to support local producers,
rather than the shareholders of large supermarket chains;
a local focus that may be regarded as reducing harmful
environmental
unnecessary
transportation of goods thousands of miles. [3점]

impacts

① to be changed by

② from which arises

③ that are likely to compromise

④ caused by what could be interpreted as

영 어                                        

2

8. The tasks involving modern architecture and the problems
it must solve are not purely connected with new additions
to ancient buildings. One of the most important problems is
that of modernization, and this operation logically means the
use of modern architecture. The question is, exactly how far,
where alterations in the internal structure of ancient
buildings are required in order to ensure their survival
without ___________ those very qualities which make them
worth preserving, is it necessary and permissible to make
use of modern architectural devices?

① destroying
③ connecting

② accusing
④ sustaining

9. Networks are open structures that develop through the
addition of new nodes. They tend to have a more informal
nature in comparison with the hierarchical and ordered
nature of traditional forms of social relations. Networks are
horizontal and reciprocal, more open and flexible, although
ultimately they form some more or less stable pattern of
social relations. Some of the more postmodern theorists of
networks are inclined to make more explicitly anti-realist
claims that conflate the existence of networks with
issues, arguing that networks are not
epistemological
epistemological centers and peripheries but a
network
of nodes in and through which theorists, theories, and
multiple users move and meet.

① decentralized
③ functionalized

② incorporated
④ institutionalized

10. Disgust is a universal human emotion, signaled with its
own facial expression and codified everywhere in food
taboos. Like all the emotions, disgust has profound effects
on human affairs. During World War II, American pilots in
the Pacific went hungry rather than eat the toads and bugs
they had been taught were perfectly safe. Food
that
ethnic markers, persisting long
aversions are
after other traditions have been abandoned.

① tenacious
③ restrained

② ephemeral
④ uncommon

[11-15] 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 알맞은 것을 고르시오.

11.

, splendid in itself, cannot be fully reconciled
with the need for planning, organization, careful and
responsible calculation. The pursuit of truth—the noblest of
aims—cannot be fully reconciled with the happiness that
men desire, for even if I know that I have some incurable
disease of pursuing truth, this will not make me happier or
freer. I must always choose: between peace and excitement,
or knowledge and blissful ignorance. [3점]

① Mercy
③ Spontaneity

② Justice
④ Voluntary action

12. The results of life are uncalculated and uncalculable. The
years teach much which the days never know. The persons
who compose our company converse, and come and go, and
design and execute many things, and somewhat comes of
it all, but an unlooked-for result. The individual designed
many things, and drew in other persons as coadjutors,
quarrelled with some or all, blundered much, and something
is done; all are a little advanced, but the individual is always
_________. It turns out somewhat new and very unlike what
he promised himself.

① creative
③ pedantic

② mistaken
④ understood

13. It’s hard to be a good liar, even when it comes to your
own intentions, which only you can verify. Intentions come
from emotions, and emotions have evolved displays on the
face and body. Unless you are a master of the Stanislavsky
method, you will have trouble faking them; in fact, they
probably evolved because they were hard to fake. Worse,
lying is stressful, and anxiety has its own telltale markers.
They are the rationale for polygraphs, the so-called lie
detectors, and humans evolved to be lie detectors, too. Then
there is the annoying fact that some propositions logically
entails others. Since some of the things you say will be true,
you are always in danger of exposing your own lies. As the
Yiddish saying goes, a liar must have a good
.
[3점]

① memory
③ intention

② emotion
④ attitude

영 어                                        

3

14. Passion and desire, their prolongation and exhaustion, may
actually be Aciman’s great authorial preoccupation. Life is
lived at the edge of desire, in the thrill of the chase. In the
essays the desire is disembodied, which in many ways
makes it that much more intense. The thing about Aciman’s
ruminations on loss is that he does not strive to regain
anything. He does not want to. It’s often too obvious to be
noted, but ___________ of desire is its death. As Aciman
says, “When you have total plenitude, you don’t know what
to do with yourself. I would love to have a beach. That’s
the dream of my life, to open the door and I have a beach.
But when I go to the beach, I’m always disappointed because
it’s boring. What do you do at a beach? There’s nothing to
do. But to think about going to the beach feeds me.” [3점]

① failure
③ displacement

② reproduction
④ consummation

“the

15. In English, the meaning of the word “tickle” is, so to speak,
the
almost antithetical, employing, as Freud said of
dreamwork,
representation for
same means of
expressing contraries.” The Oxford English Dictionary cites,
among nineteen definitions of the word, the following: “In
________________, easily upset or overthrown,
insecure,
tottering, crazy . . . nicely poised.” Other definitions describe
a range of
credulity to
incontinence. The word speaks of the precarious, and so of
the erotic. To tickle is, above all, to seduce, often by
amusement. [3점]

from excessive

experience

① unstable equilibrium
③ inevitable confrontation ④ unequivocal tranquility

② irresistible temptation

16. 다음 글에 이어질 내용으로 가장 적절한 것은?

It is not too difficult to find some campus observers publicly
arguing that college may not be the only and best place for
every young person after the completion of high school. Why?
We all know college does not necessarily make people
intelligent, open-minded, and, more importantly, happy. In a
sense, maybe just
Intelligent,
open-minded, and happy people are probably the ones who
have been attracted to college in the first place. And perhaps
those successful college graduates would have been
all
successful whether they had gone to college or not. This may
sound strange to those of us who have been brought up to
believe that if a little schooling is good, more has to be much
better. But contrary evidence is beginning to mount up.

the other way around.

① impressive success rate of college graduates

② proof that college may not be the best option

③ mounting pressure to redesign college curriculum
④ ever-increasing number of students in graduate

programs

[17-18] 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 알맞은 것을 고르시오.

17. Alongside the debates about how “development” can be
achieved, since the 1990s, the concept of “post-development”
has come to the fore. One of
the most well-known
proponents of this approach is Escobar, who uses the case
study of Colombia to discuss the development process. By
“development” he means the highly technocratic approach
adopted by the World Bank, the US government and other
Northern institutions in the post-Second World War period.
His argument is that before “outsiders” came into Colombia,
there was no such thing as “poverty” and therefore no need
for “development.” While most people had what would be
defined as low life expectancies, many children lacked access
to formal education and houses lacked water and electricity,
these factors were not usually regarded as problems.
Escobar argues that by imposing
on
Colombian society and economy, the country was interpreted
as “lacking development.” This lack could only be addressed
by adopting Northern forms of “development”; hence
numerous types of intervention in the form of aid and
technical assistance.

① a US-centered global order

② the notion of cultural difference

③ Northern forms of legal system

④ external norms and expectations

18. Perceptual psychologists believe that, once the nerve
impulses have been received and an object has been
perceived as an identifiable entity, it tends to be seen as a
stable object having permanent characteristics, despite
variations in its illumination, the position from which it is
viewed, or the distance at which it appears. Thus, an
individual viewing a new scene interprets it by synthesizing
past experience with sensory cues present in the new scene
― using depth cues such as linear perspective, partial
concealment of a far object by a near one or the presence
of aerial perspective “haze.” Fortunately for the graphic
designer, however, the brain can be deceived! Indeed, this
deception is the very basis of graphic design. For example,
it is because
the converging
its
lines
three-dimensional depth, that, by drawing the building using
converging lines and shaded surfaces on a two-dimensional
surface, we trick the brain into seeing the drawing as having
three dimensions. [3점]

building with

shaded

faces

and

of

a

① our intuition tends to unite

② a sensory cue is used to link

③ the brain is conditioned to associate

④ an interpretative lens is adopted to tie

영 어                                        

4

[19-21] 다음의 각 주어진 문장이 들어갈 가장 알맞은 곳은?

19.

21.

Instead, Athena persuades them to join the city, giving
them a place of honor beneath the earth,
in recognition
of their importance for those same legal institutions and
the future health of the city.

At the end of Aeschylus’ Oresteia, two transformations
take place in the archaic world of the characters. In the
famous transformation, Athena introduces legal institutions
to replace and terminate the seemingly endless cycle of
blood vengeance. (A) Setting up a court with established
procedures of reasoned argument and the weighing of
evidence, an independent third-party judge, and a jury
selected from the citizen body of Athens, she announces
that blood guilt will now be settled by law, rather than by
the Furies, ancient goddesses of revenge. (B) But the Furies
are not simply dismissed. (C) Typically this move of
Athena’s is understood to be a recognition that the legal
system must incorporate the dark vindictive passions and
honor them. (D) Thus the great Hellenist Hugh Lloyd-Jones
concludes, “Far from wishing to abolish the prerogatives of
the Erinyes, Athena is anxious to conserve them.” [3점]

① (A)

③ (C)

20.

② (B)

④ (D)

formulated the

He
parallelism,
according to which vegetation responses to climate
change were parallel in different parts of the world.

regional

concept

of

it

as

key tool

In 1916, Swedish geologist Lennart von Post showed
that by identifying and counting pollen preserved at
different depths in Swedish peat bogs he could infer
changes in forest composition through time. Following
his pioneering work, pollen analysis quickly became
for understanding past
established
a
vegetation, climate, and ecosystems.
is
(A) Today,
used widely to reconstruct past ecosystems and test
hypotheses about drivers of ecosystem change. Using
pollen analysis, von Post explored the temporal changes
in postglacial
in
southern Sweden. (B) He then demonstrated the spatial
patterns of change by mapping his pollen data at
selected times. (C) He also developed pollen analysis as
resolving postglacial
a
1930s
sea-level
1950s,
to
the world were
pollen-analytical
performed
estimate
pollen-accumulation rates, elucidate the relationship of
modern pollen spectra to vegetation, and map pollen data
through time. [3점]

relative-dating technique
changes.

In
the
around
vegetation

(D)
studies
establish

composition at many sites

history,

forest

for

to

① (A)

③ (C)

② (B)

④ (D)

Professor Case insists his death could have been prevented

if students had better access to school counselors and support

groups.

Both the general public and parents of school age
children have been slow to recognize how damaging
cyberbullying can be. (A) According to Professor Case,
a leading expert on cyberbullying at Pacifica Central
University, victims experience a sense of alienation and
low self-esteem. (B) He points to the recent suicide of
teenager Jerome Farthing who committed suicide after
receiving countless threatening text messages and emails
mocking him for being overweight. (C) A review of his
phone and email records showed a staggering 563 text
messages and 1,465 emails taunting and threatening him.
(D) Statistics show that schools and communities with
dedicated counselors and cyberbullying policies have
higher rate of reported incidents but a lower rate of
severe cases.

① (A)

③ (C)

② (B)

④ (D)

22. 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

People from cultures on polychronic time live their lives quite
differently than do those who move to the monochronic clock.
The pace for P-time cultures is more leisurely than the one
found in M-time cultures. One reason for this is that people
and human relationships, not tasks, are at the center of
polychronic cultures. These cultures are normally collective
and deal with life in a holistic manner. For P-time cultures,
time is less tangible; hence, feelings of wasted time are not
as prevalent as in M-time cultures. Their members can
interact with more than one person or do more than one thing
at a time, while people from M-time cultures suppress
spontaneity and tend to focus on one activity at a time. This
explains why there are more interruptions in conversations
carried on by people from Arabic, Asian, and Latin American
cultures compared to the ones from Germany, Austria,
Switzerland, and the U.S.

① Feelings of wasted time are more prevalent in P-time

cultures.

② People in polychronic cultures can do multiple things

simultaneously.

③ People in monochronic cultures think highly of

relationships with others.

④ Arabic, Asian, and Latin American cultures are

categorized as M-time cultures.

영 어                                        

5

23. 다음 글에 제시된 “the ecobiodevelopmental theory”에 대
한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?

We now know that early experiences actually affect the
architecture of the brain—the way neural connections are
made and strengthened or lost. The ecobiodevelopmental
theory takes our current scientific knowledge and applies it
to development. This theory proposes that a new approach to
providing health and intervention services could make a
significant difference in the lives and health of children whose
background has traditionally contributed to poor health, poor
relationships, and poor performance in school and work. By
concentrating on all aspects of health and providing parenting
and learning supports, we could change the evolving structure
of the brain within our poorest children.

① The developing brain could be affected by stressful

environment.

② Health and intervention services could support the

developing brain.

③ The experiences in the early years of life could affect

the architecture of the brain.

④ Humans have evolved with brain structures ready to
learn about those things necessary to survival.

its life,

25. In reality, each generation starts its life in the traditional
settings the past has left to it, and, however much it strives
to fashion these settings in its own image, it will never
succeed, even by the end of
in completely
modernizing them. Sites,
therefore, are in the main
architectural settings inherited from the past, which,
whether we like it or not, we must accept as existent factors
and develop in our turn. Hence any human settlement
necessarily means coexistence between past and future and
this coexistence, which will vary according to date and
location, will invariably reflect, within a site, the latter’s
personality as geographically, socially and historically
determined. The most
this
personality will be embodied in the historical monuments of
the place, which are thus an integral part of that structure
in space which reaches from the past towards the future,
and as such must be preserved and survive together with
it. [3점]

outstanding features

of

① We need to protect monuments by seeking the means

of revitalizing them.

② It is impossible to modernize the architectural settings

from the past completely.

③ Historical monuments should be treated as an

encumbrance to progress.

[24-26] 다음 글을 바탕으로 유추할 때 적절하지 않은 것을
고르시오.

④ A contemporary community is recognized to be the

continuous coexistence of past and present.

24. The normative position of the liberal paradigm follows
straightforwardly from its explanatory theories. Liberals
reject the realist notion that progress in international affairs
is impossible. They argue that collaboration can make all
participants better off and that it should therefore be a
priority in international affairs. Much of the substantive
discussion of issues in contemporary international politics
concerns the perceived need for states to work together to
solve
and
environmental affairs, much of the discussion concerns what
international collaboration should look like and how best to
promote it. [3점]

economic, health,

In security,

problems.

① Liberals suggest that progress in international politics

is possible.

② Liberals argue that collaboration should be a priority

in international affairs.

③ Liberals provide a much less pessimistic outlook on

international affairs than do the realists.

④ Liberals believe that

the basic characteristic of
international relationships have not changed over the
many past years.

26. If the past is a foreign country, it is a shockingly violent
one. It is easy to forget how dangerous life used to be, how
deeply brutality was once woven into the fabric of daily
experience. Cultural memory pacified the past, leaving us
with pale souvenirs whose bloody origins have been
bleached away. A woman donning a cross seldom reflects
that this instrument of torture was a common punishment
in the ancient world. We are surrounded by signs of the
depravity of our ancestors’ way of life, but we are barely
aware of them. No aspect of life is untouched by the retreat
from violence. Daily existence is very different if you always
have to worry about being abducted or killed, and it’s hard
to develop sophisticated arts, learning, or commerce if the
institutions that support them are looted and burned as
quickly as they are built. [3점]

① Violence in the past would startle us today.
② Violence has increased over a long stretch of time until

today.

③ Today we may be living in the most peaceful era in

our species’ existence.

④ A glance at our cultural heritage could awaken us to

how differently people did things in the past.

영 어                                        

6

27. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?

[28-29] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

Italian
The trouble is with the assimilative nature of
immigrants. In a few years even the older immigrants are apt
to pick up our language, and one by one to abandon their native
customs and ways of thought. Even in the theater they spoke
to each other mainly in English. In seeking amusement they
fall prey to the flash and glare of our variety bill-posters. The
new generation, who lack the traditions of the home country,
and sometimes the knowledge of Italy to appreciate its drama,
are almost certain to become Americanized in their tastes. An
Italian theater could appeal only to new arrivals and to those
of the past generation who have not forgotten their old life
and the joy of true acting.

① Italian immigrants who cling in their old traditions and

legends

② the power of the melting pot across ethnic and national

boundaries

③ Italian immigrants’ preference of American traditions

to the traditions of their home country

④ a generational difference concerning cultural preferences
between first-generation Italian immigrants and their
offspring

is

novel

situation

indicating that

It is suggested that moods perform an adaptive function.
Positive mood indicates that
the situation is safe and
familiar, and that existing knowledge can be relied upon.
In contrast, negative mood functions like a mild alarm
and
the
signal,
unfamiliar, and that
the careful monitoring of new,
information is required. There is supporting
external
increases, and
evidence suggesting that positive affect
tendency to rely on
negative affect decreases ― the
internal knowledge rather than external
information in
cognitive tasks, resulting in a selective memory bias for
self-generated information. The theory thus predicts both
positive and negative mood can produce processing
advantages, albeit
in response to different situations
requiring different processing styles. Given the almost
exclusive emphasis on the benefits of positive affect in
this is an important message with some
our culture,
intriguing real-life implications. Numerous studies now
suggests
definite
processing advantages in situations when ____________
is required.

negative mood

produce

that

can

28. 문맥상 밑줄 친 “adaptive”가 의미하는 것으로 가장 적절한

것은? [3점]

① protecting us from a flood of information

② helping us to develop a general-purpose cognitive skill

③ enabling us to change gradually over a long period of time
④ preparing us to respond to different environmental

challenges

29. 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① the effort-minimizing skill

② the self-generated information

③ the careful monitoring of new, external information

④ the analysis of cognitive, psychological consequences

영 어                                        

7

[30-31] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

[32-33] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

loud.

patients

suffering

letters and asks whether or not

Professor Westbury has been doing important work,
exploring the connections between language difficulties
and brain function. As part of his inquiry, Westbury
presents
from aphasia ― whose
comprehension of words and speech is often impaired ―
with a string of
it
constitutes a real English word. One day, a graduate
student pointed out something curious: certain nonsense
words consistently made patients smile and sometimes
even laugh out
“Particularly,” Westbury says,
“‘snunkoople’.” He started checking with friends and
colleagues to see whether they had the same reaction,
and the response was nearly unanimous. Snunkoople
was
funny. But why? Westbury presents what he
believes could be the answer: the inherent funniness of
a word, or at least of context-free non-words, can be
created equal.
quantified ― and not
According to Westbury, the less statistically likely it is
for a certain collection of letters to form a real word in
English,
is. The playwright Neil Simon
seemed to grasp this implicitly in his 1972 work The
Sunshine Boys,
tells his
nephew, “If it doesn’t have a ‘k’ in it, it’s not funny!” ―
“k” being one of the least frequently used letters in the
alphabet.

in which an old character

the funnier it

all nonsense

is

to

the

irresistibly drawn

What is beyond doubt is that from first to last Hannah
Arendt was
activity of
understanding, an endless and circular mental activity.
Hannah Arendt had plenty of ideas and opinions, to be
and desiring
sure; hailed as both wanting change
stability, she made new distinctions, contributed new
concepts, and altered old categories of traditional political
thought. Those are results, and they have proved useful
to others. But, unlike most political thinkers, Arendt was
not primarily concerned with solving problems; her
ceaseless ventures in understanding were for her no
more
than life itself. What is more difficult
to grasp is that the activity of understanding afforded
her a measure of reconciliation to the world in which
she lived. If others came to understand,
in her sense of
understanding, then she was gratified and made to feel
“at home.” This does not mean she wanted or believed
it possible to hand over her own thoughts to anyone
else. That would have been sheer nonsense to Arendt,
for whom thinking ― understanding, endowing an event
oneself,
with meaning ― was
solitary and private. She led an exemplary life, a life
that has been told and retold, but ultimately the light
shed on the world by her understanding of it is the only
way to catch a glimpse of who Hannah Arendt was.

engagement with

an

30. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① Aphasia: The Way We Laugh

② Why Certain Words Are Funny

③ Humor as an Art of Equivocation

④ “Snunkoople,” an Unusual Cluster of Letters

32. 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① intuitive

③ instrumental

② intentional

④ indeterminate

33. Hannah Arendt에 대한 설명으로 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]

31. 밑줄 친 “this”가 의미하는 것으로 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]

① By nature she could be considered to be either liberal or

① Laughter is the by-product of a kind of incongruity.
② The less plausible a word sounds, the funnier we deem

it to be.

③ Laughter arises from the sudden violation of an

expectation.

④ Humor works when a word squares intuitively with our

expectations.

conservative.

② She was gradually cut off from the outside world in her

later career.

③ Her activities cannot be defined in terms of traditional

disciplinary categories.

④ The

importance of understanding for her
understanding itself rather than in its results.

lay in

영 어                                        

8

[34-35] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

[36-37] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

The general answer to all these questions is the same:
culture. As Bailey points out, “cultures vary in their ways
of thinking and ways of behaving.” (A) As you may have
noticed, all of the questions we posed dealt with thinking
and behaving. Although culture is not the only stimulus
behind your behavior, its omnipresent quality makes it one
of the most powerful. (B) Furthermore, what makes culture
so unique is that you share your culture with other people
who have been exposed to similar experiences. While your
personal experiences and genetic heritage form the unique
“you,” culture unites people with a collective frame of
reference that
is the domain of a community, not a
characteristic of a single person. (C) Nolan reaffirms that
culture is a group worldview, the way of organizing the
world that a particular society has created over time. (D)
This framework or web of meaning allows the members
of that society to make sense of themselves, their world,
and their experiences in that world. It is this sharing of a
common reality that gives people within a particular culture
a common fund of knowledge.

34. 밑줄 친 “all these questions”의 예로 유추하기에 적절하지 않은

것은?

① Why do some people believe in God?

② Why do some people have genetic disease?
③ Why do some people paint and decorate their entire

bodies?

④ Why do some people shake hands when introduced

to a stranger?

35. 아래의 문장이 들어갈 곳으로 가장 알맞은 곳은?

Those firms and industries that are not participating in

the world market have to recognize that in today’s trade
environment isolation has become impossible. Willing or
unwilling, more and more firms are becoming participants

in global business affairs. Even if not by choice, most
firms and individuals are affected directly or indirectly by

economic and political developments that occur in the
international marketplace. Those firms that refuse to

participate are relegated to reacting to the global
marketplace and therefore are unprepared for harsh
competition from abroad.

Some

recognized the need for
international adjustments. Farmers understand the need

industries have

for high productivity in light of stiff
international
competition. Computer makers and firms in other

technologically advanced industries have learned to forge
global relationships to stay in the race. Firms in the steel,
textile, and leather sectors have shifted production, and

perhaps even adjusted their core business, in response to
overwhelming onslaughts from abroad. Other industries

in some countries have been caught unaware and have
been unable to adjust. The result is the extinction of firms

or entire industries, such as VCRs in the United States
and coal mining and steel smelting in other countries.

36. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① Road Not Taken: Entrepreneurship in the Future

② New Challenges Looming over the Global Market
③ Different Players, Different Rules in the Business

World

④ Two Faces of Global Business: A Dilemma of Being

As Hofstede points out, “Culture is to a human collective

“Global/Local”

what personality is to an individual.”

① (A)

③ (C)

② (B)

④ (D)

37. 위 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은? [3점]

① Farmers recognize the need for high productivity to

survive in global competition.

② Coal mining and steel smelting in the United States
were able to adjust to today’s trade environment.
③ Firms in the steel, textile, and leather sectors have
core

changed production without adjusting their
business.
④ A number of
productive
environment.

firms and industries continue to be
trade

from today’s

isolation

in

영 어                                      

9

[38-39] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

[40-41] 다음 글을 읽고 물음에 답하시오.

capitalist

“National

economies” have

According to Marxist theorists, the globe has long been
dominated by a single integrated economic and political
entity—a global
system—that has gradually
incorporated all of humanity within its grasp. Within this
system, all elements have always been interrelated and
long been
interdependent.
integrated to such an extent that their very nature has been
dependent on their position within a capitalist world
economy. The only thing “new” is an increased awareness
these linkages. Similarly, ecological processes have
of
always ignored state boundaries, even if it is only recently
that growing environmental degradation has finally allowed
this fact to permeate public consciousness. The task facing
Marxists today is to lay the foundations for a new way of
organizing society—a global society that is more just and
more humane than our own.

to

need

balance

achieve

between

A basic principle governing the status of older adults is
their
a
the
contributions to society and the costs of supporting
them. The process of modernization and technological
development often conflicts with traditions of
.
the family continues to play an essential role in
But
supporting its oldest members in most societies. The
to which older citizens are engaged in society
extent
appears
power
resources, such as their material possessions, knowledge,
and social authority.
In most of their exchanges, older
people seek to maintain reciprocity and to be active,
their own
autonomous agents in the management of
lives. That
time,
caregiving or other resources in exchange for services.

to vary with the nature

to give money,

they prefer

their

is,

of

38. 위 글에서 Marxists의 주장이라고 유추할 수 없는 것은?

40. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 알맞은 표현은? [3점]

[3점]

① filial piety

② mutual help

① The reorganization of the societal foundations in the

③ family meeting

④ collective wisdom

global economy is impossible.

② The growing integration of national economies has long

accompanied the expansion of capitalism.

41. 위 글을 다음과 같이 요약했을 때 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절

③ The growth of multinational corporations moves towards

한 것은?

the further integration of the global economy.

④ Within a global capitalist system, development of any
particular state would be affected by its relations with
others.

In general, old people who can no longer work but

control

resources

essential

to

fulfill

the needs

of

younger group members

.

39. 밑줄 친 “permeate”와 의미상 가장 가까운 것은?

① unify

③ deceive

② affect

④ repress

① are able to create rapid societal changes

② place unexpected burdens on younger people

③ are passive agents in the management of their lives

④ offset the societal costs incurred in maintaining them

